Make trait methods callable in const contexts (#3762)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/0000-const-trait-impls.md

Reviewer: I'd like to see `#[derive]`'ing being discussed in this RFC, it's notably absent from it and shouldn't be an afterthought in my opinion.

Namely, there should be a canonical/conventional mechanism for deriving a "const trait impl" from/for an ADT.
Whether such an impl would be (unconditionally) const, conditionally const, or either depending on a "flag" would be a point for discussion.

It should be quite obvious why you'd want to const-derive a trait and why `#[derive]` itself shouldn't derive "conditionally const trait impls" by default.

---

As for the concrete design, there should be way to canonical/conventional signal to the (built-in or user-defined) derive macro that a "const" trait impl is requested.

As @petrochenkov noted in https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/118580#issuecomment-1900864893, https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/118580#issuecomment-1902053671 and https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/118580#issuecomment-1902054343 there are three extensible candidates:

1. Leveraging helper attributes. At call sites, that might look like

   ```rs
   #[derive(One, Two)]
   #[one(const), two(const)]
   …
   ```

   I guess. At def sites, it would just look like

   ```rs
   #[proc_macro_derive(One, attributes(one))]
   pub fn derive_one(_item: TokenStream) -> TokenStream { … }
   ```

2. Giving derive macros a second input stream. At call sites, that might look like

   ```rs
   #[derive(One(const), Two(const))]
   …
   ```

   At def sites:

   ```rs
   #[proc_macro_derive(One)]
   pub fn derive_one(_item: TokenStream, _arg: TokenStream) -> TokenStream { … }
   ```

   Note that the one-argument form would still exist for backward compatibility. This arity-based overloading is very much possible for proc macros. See e.g., PR https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/118580. Of course, we could choose to do something different here but I'd prefer if we didn't force a new edition for this.

3. Passing another input stream via "global data" (which is what e.g., `Span::call_site()` uses under the hood). At call sites, that might look like

     ```rs
   #[derive(One(const), Two(const))]
   …
   ```

   At def sites:

   ```rs
   #[proc_macro_derive(One)]
   pub fn derive_one(_item: TokenStream) -> TokenStream {
      let _arg/*: TokenStream */ = extra_input_stream();
      …
   }
   ```

---

For context, the compiler currently features the *placeholder syntax* `#[derive_const]` under the experimental feature `derive_const`. Obviously, that syntax is quite awkward and non-extensible (to other potential effects or data in general we might want to pass to proc macros in the future).

Reviewer 2: I think the derive syntax should reflect the bound syntax: `#[derive(const Trait)]`.

Reviewer 3: > It should be quite obvious... why `#[derive]` itself shouldn't derive "conditionally const trait impls" by default.

Perhaps you could elaborate on this.  I can think of some reasons, but I want to sure I've thought of all the reasons.

> I think the derive syntax should reflect the bound syntax: `#[derive(const Trait)]`.

For a related syntax discussion, see:

- https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3715

Reviewer 2: > For a related syntax discussion, see https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3715

`unsafe` is a property of the *derivation operation* there, while `const` is a property of the *devived `impl`* here. The syntaxes for each should be different, to reflect that distinction.

Reviewer: > > It should be quite obvious... why `#[derive]` itself shouldn't derive "conditionally const trait impls" by default.
>
> Perhaps you could elaborate on this.  I can think of some reasons, but I want to sure I've thought of all the reasons.

Yes, of course. For the sake of argument, let's assume that this RFC establishes the convention for derive macros to generate const trait impls either always or by default.

1. It would create a medium-term divide in the ecosystem: The large amount of derive macros written by users before the hypothetical stabilization of feature `const_trait_impl` would naturally keep generating non-const trait impls until migrated (which takes time) contrary to the ones created after it. This could be perceived as confusing by newcomers and frustrating by seasoned Rust devs.
2. If not made an an edition item, it would implicitly and irrevocably alter the public API of all library crates which expose types to which built-in derive macros (from `core` / `std`) were applied as suddenly said crates would promise more (conditionally) const impls which they can't go back on without a major version update.
3. Assuming that there's no opt-out (unlikely, I admit), going forward there would no longer be a canonical / conventional way to derive non-const trait impls (which are convenient and obviously allow for greater leeway wrt. the implementation) forcing users to write those impls by hand (possibly error prone) or create their own conventions and mechanisms.
4. Assuming that there's an opt-out, then deriving would still no longer mirror manual impls wrt. to constness since constness is notoriously opt-in. That also would mean finding new syntax that's unlike anything preexisting (think `#[derive(nonconst Trait)]` or similar).

Author: We're sticking with the already implemented `#[derive_const(Trait)]` syntax and leaving it to future RFCs after `unsafe` derives are finalized to come up with something better

Reviewer 4: Note: A lot of the discussion around the language design are happening on Zulip, under the t-lang/effects stream. The latest major proposal discussion can be found at https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/328082-t-lang.2Feffects/topic/All.20that's.20old.20is.20new.20again. It would be nice if before commenting on this RFC one could check if this topic has been discussed on the Zulip stream before :)

- Feature Name: `const_trait_methods`
- Start Date: 2024-12-13
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)

> - Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#67792](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/67792)

Reviewer 5: this should probably be changed to a new tracking issue, see: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/67792#issuecomment-2603351678

* Allow marking `trait` impls as `const`.
* Allow marking trait bounds as `const` to make methods of them callable in const contexts.

Fully contained example ([Playground of currently working example](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=2ab8d572c63bcf116b93c632705ddc1b)):

```rust
const trait Default {
    fn default() -> Self;
}

impl const Default for () {
    fn default() {}
}

const fn default<T: ~const Default>() -> T {
    T::default()
}

fn compile_time_default<T: const Default>() -> T {
    const { T::default() }
}

const _: () = Default::default();

fn main() {
    let () = default();
    let () = compile_time_default();
    let () = Default::default();
}
```

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Const code is currently only able to use a small subset of Rust code, as many standard library APIs and builtin syntax things require calling trait methods to work.
As an example, in const contexts you cannot use even basic equality on anything but primitives:

```rust
const fn foo() {
    let a = [1, 2, 3];
    let b = [1, 2, 4];
    if a == b {} // ERROR: cannot call non-const operator in constant functions
}
```

## Background

> This RFC requires familarity with "const contexts", so you may have to read [the relevant reference section](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/const_eval.html#const-context) first.

Reviewer 6: I see constness as a binary property of an interface: either it’s `const` or it’s not. You introduce new syntax (`const Trait`, `impl const Trait`, `T: const Trait` and `T: ~const Trait`), but is the initial problem (not being able to call a trait method (not marked `const`) in a const-context an API problem? I’m not so certain.

My point is that if you have a function of the form `const fn`, then it’s perfectly fine to call it at runtime. If you have to implement a `fn` function, but provide its implementation with a `const fn`, then it’s perfectly okay.

```rust
const fn default<T: Default>() -> T {
    T::default()
}
```

Because the function is marked `const`, we already have all the info in the type system to know that any method called with `<T as Default>` _must_ be implemented as a `const fn`.

Then why not just accept that code, and only authorize calling it for `T` implementing `Default` by providing a `const fn` for `Default::default`? I.e. allowing this:

```rust
trait Default {
    fn default();
}

impl Default for MyType {
    const fn default() {  MyType { x: 123 } }
}
```

I fail to see the unsoundness of doing this, because it should be allowed to implement a `fn` with a `const fn`, and I think that would solve most of the problems try to solve?

Reviewer 4: Please read the thread above discussing syntax, which has a list of reasons why deriving the constness of trait bounds from the context would not work.

https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1913923681

Reviewer 6: I read it, and I’m not entirely sure why (I might have missed an argument against it?).

Reviewer 7: This doesn't work because you can have trait bounds on `const fn` now. You simply can't call any methods on the trait. So requiring all methods be const is a breaking change. And Rust (almost) never looks at the body of a function to see if a call-aite is well typed. That would be a backwards compatibility hazard, since any change to the body of a function could be a breaking change. 

Irrelevant note: if you are using impl trait in return position. Then Send and Sync are inferred from the body, but this is the exception to the rule.

Reviewer 6: > This doesn't work because you can have trait bounds on const fn now. You simply can't call any methods on the trait. 

But that’s my point! Since we can’t call them, why not simply not just add constness bounds?

```rust
// current Rust
const fn default<T: Default>() -> T {
    // we can’t call anything from T because Default::default is not const
}

// what would work
const fn default<T: Default<default: const>>() -> T {
    // no we can cherry-pick what is const, and thus here we can call default::<T>() where <T as Default>::default() is const
}
```

What am I missing?

Reviewer 4: adopting per-method return_type_notation-style const bounds is pretty orthogonal to this RFC since this RFC proposes full-trait constness. One reason against replacing full-trait constness is that `Iterator`'s methods all need to require `next` to be `const` for themselves to be `const`, requiring loads of bounds like that for additional noise which full-trait constness trivializes.

> I read it, and I’m not entirely sure why (I might have missed an argument against it?).

What you originally proposed (allowing `const fn a<T: Foo>() { T::foo(); }` to _just work_) has been debated many times, and I posted some of the reasons in my linked thread. Besides the countless language design concerns needed to be considered for those semantics, I do not think the main stakeholders (project-const-traits) on the compiler side is willing to implement such semantics.

Reviewer 6: > What you originally proposed (allowing `const fn a<T: Foo>() { T::foo(); }` to _just work_) has been debated many times, and I posted some of the reasons in my linked thread. Besides the countless language design concerns needed to be considered for those semantics, I do not think the main stakeholders (project-const-traits) on the compiler side is willing to implement them.

Okay, I get that, hence why I suggested the syntax `T: Trait<method: const>`.

---

For the `Iterator` example, it would require `Self::next: const` at the implementor level, right? Not at the trait definition.

Reviewer 8: > For the Iterator example, it would require Self::next: const at the implementor level, right? Not at the trait definition.

How do you handle methods defined on the trait itself? Of which Iterator has many.  Such methods would need to be const if and only if the next method of the implementation is const.

Reviewer 2: > > For the Iterator example, it would require Self::next: const at the implementor level, right? Not at the trait definition.
> 
> How do you handle methods defined on the trait itself? Of which Iterator has many. Such methods would need to be const if and only if the next method of the implementation is const.

My thinking here is that a `where Self::method: ~const` bound on a `const fn` in the trait definition would be considered to apply to the default implementation. For example, all the `Iterator` combinator methods would have `where Self::next: ~const`.

Reviewer 9: > If you have to implement a fn function, but provide its implementation with a const fn, then it’s perfectly okay.

What if I also have
```rust
const fn default2<T: Default>(x: T) -> T {
    x
}
```
This may seem like a silly function to write, but in general it may certainly happen that you write a `const fn` with a bound and then don't use the bound. (In fact you can already do that on stable.)

Would you say that calling that function with a `T` whose `Default` impl is non-const should be accepted or not?
- If it should be accepted, then we are violating the principle that the function signature fully determines how the type-checker treats this function.
- If it should not be accepted, that's a breaking change.

the usual `const fn` rules. This is necessary in order to allow a const block
(which can access generic parameters) in the function body to invoke methods on the generic parameter.

So, we need some annotation that differentiates a `T: Default` bound from one that gives us the guarantees we're looking for.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

## Nomenclature and new syntax concepts

### Const trait impls

It is now allowed to prefix a trait name in an impl block with `const`, marking that this `impl`'s type is now allowed to
have methods of this `impl`'s trait to be called in const contexts (if all where bounds hold, like usual, but more on this later).

An example looks as follows:

```rust
impl const Trait for Type {}
```

Such impls require that the trait is a `const trait`.

All method bodies in a const trait impl are [const contexts](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/const_eval.html#const-context).

### Const traits

Traits need to opt-in to being allowed to have const trait impls. Thus you need to declare your traits by prefixing the `trait` keyword with `const`:

```rust

> const trait Trait {}

Reviewer 10: One thing which is worth briefly touching upon is the idea of traits *without* methods being marked `const`, since it technically does nothing *by itself*. It's a useful API guarantee if you choose to later add methods, but in the future, we may have traits which have an API guarantee to never have methods (e.g. `marker_trait`), and it's not clear how we should handle those. Even though it's speculating about unstable features, I think it's worth at least mentioning.

Author: I don't know what to write here. A trait without methods being const can be useful as a marker in blanket impls or just constraining what types can go into a function because you want to limit it without there being a type system reason in the body of the function (some unsafe stuff maybe?).

```

> This in turn checks all methods' default bodies as if they were `const fn`, making them callable in const contexts.

Reviewer 10: Since you want inline threading and I'm not sure where best to put this, but you should probably talk about how `const fn` and methods in const traits are compatible with `const Fn` traits, since you otherwise only briefly touch on `const fn` pointers, which are related but not technically the same.

Even if const closures are an unanswered question, I'd prefer if `Option::map` and similar methods were possible if you passed them `const fn`s defined explicitly.

Impls can now rely on the default methods being const, too, and don't need to override them with a const body.

We may add an attribute later to allow you to mark individual trait methods as not-const so that when creating a const trait, one can
add (defaulted or not) methods that cannot be used in const contexts.

It is possible to split up a trait into the const an non-const parts as discussed [here](#cant-have-const-methods-and-nonconst-methods-on-the-same-trait).

All default method bodies of const trait declarations are [const contexts](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/const_eval.html#const-context).

Note that on nightly the syntax is

```rust
#[const_trait]
trait Trait {}
```

and a result of this RFC would be that we would remove the attribute and add the `const trait` syntax.

### Const trait bounds

> Any item that can have trait bounds can also have `const Trait` bounds.

Reviewer 11: In rfcs#3729, we had a question about what the precedence should be for relaxed bounds - `?(const Sized)` or `(?const) Sized`? Are you opt-ing out of the constness or the whole trait?

```rust
struct NewType<T>(T);

impl<T: ~const Add<Output = T>> const Add for NewType<T> {
    type Output = Self;
    fn add(self, other: Self) -> Self::Output {
        NewType(self.0 + other.0)
    }
}
```

But if any code path could drop a value...

```rust
struct NewType<T>(T, bool);

struct Error;

impl<T: ~const Add<Output = T>> const Add for NewType<T> {
    type Output = Result<Self, Error>;
    fn add(self, other: Self) -> Self::Output {
        if self.1 {
            Ok(NewType(self.0 + other.0, other.1))
        } else {
            // Drops both `self.0` and `self.1`
            Err(Error)
        }
    }
}
```

... then we need to add a `~const Destruct` bound to `T`, to ensure
`NewType<T>` can be dropped.

This bound in turn will be infectious to all generic users of `NewType` like

```rust
const fn add<T: ~const Add>(
    a: NewType<T>,
    b: NewType<T>,
) -> Result<NewType<T::Output>, Error> {
    a + b
}
```

which now need a `T: ~const Destruct` bound, too.
In practice we have noticed that a large portion of APIs will have a `~const Destruct` bound.
This bound has little value as an explicit bound that appears almost everywhere.

> Especially since it is a fairly straight forward assumption that a type that has const trait impls will also have a `const Drop` impl or only contain `const Destruct` types.

Reviewer 10: You do mention `const Drop` impls later inthe RFC with regards to bounds, but I'd make an additional note here or before here clarifying that `const Drop` implementations are allowed, since at first glance it's not immediately clear what their purpose would be.

A simple example might be worthwhile: even though you can't mutate global state, you could for example have a value being borrowed inside the object which gets mutated in some way in the `Drop` impl, which can be done in const context.

This also adds another interesting question: is `forget` allowed for non-`const Destruct` types? I would assume yes, but it's not clear here.

Reviewer 2: > This also adds another interesting question: is `forget` allowed for non-`const Destruct` types? I would assume yes, but it's not clear here.

It would be a breaking change to start disallowing it, so yes, it would continue to work

Reviewer 10: I actually had no idea what the current behaviour was for forget, so, thank you for clarifying that. Definitely worth mentioning in the RFC itself.

Author: I don't see a good place to put this but I also found it fairly obvious that `forget` is always fine for any input considering it has no bounds at all

Thus we give all `const trait`s a `~const Destruct` super trait to ensure users don't need to add `~const Destruct` bounds everywhere.

> We may offer an opt out of this behaviour in the future, if there are convincing real world use cases.

Reviewer 5: Some good example traits that I don't think should ever imply `~const Destruct`: `AsRef`, `AsMut`, `Borrow`, `Deref`, `PartialEq`, `ToString`, `fmt::Debug` (and other formatting traits, though `fmt::Write` is probably an exception)

> We may offer an opt out of this behaviour in the future, if there are convincing real world use cases.

Reviewer 10: Perhaps the link here is that these traits permit `?Sized` types, whereas others don't?

Perhaps there could be an argument for making `~const Destruct` simply inherited in all the places with a default `Sized` bound? This still doesn't answer the question of opting out, but at least it gives an idea of where it could be added by default.

> We may offer an opt out of this behaviour in the future, if there are convincing real world use cases.

Reviewer 12: I think `?Sized` is accidental here. The underlying thing is that if you do not accept `T` by value, you don't need to destruct it.

It just so happens that if you don't accept `T`  by value, you also likely support `!Sized` types.

> We may offer an opt out of this behaviour in the future, if there are convincing real world use cases.

Reviewer 5: yeah, a good example of where `Sized` is required but `Destruct` is not: the `Hasher` in [`Hash::hash`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/hash/trait.Hash.html#tymethod.hash) (though if we could redo it it would allow `?Sized`)

> We may offer an opt out of this behaviour in the future, if there are convincing real world use cases.

Reviewer 10: I mean, if you had `const Hash`, wouldn't you also need the `Hasher` to have `~const Destruct` here? I agree that the design isn't ideal, but given the current design, it seems to not be a good counterexample.

> We may offer an opt out of this behaviour in the future, if there are convincing real world use cases.

Author: > It's also quite easy to come up with an example where we'd want a `const` trait but not `~const Destruct`:

I think that's an ok limitation to have until we get a const heap. 

I completely understand the concern, but the examples I came up with so far were all artificial or due to other limitations

> Some good example traits that I don't think should ever imply `~const Destruct`: `AsRef`, `AsMut`, `Borrow`, `Deref`, `PartialEq`, `ToString`, `fmt::Debug` (and other formatting traits, though `fmt::Write` is probably an exception)

While I get that from looking just at the trait and a few of its usages, there are also not insignificant uses of those traits where you take the thing by value, not by reference, and the caller decides whether to give you a reference or the value itself.

I think if you are implementing `const Deref` or `const PartialEq` for your type, it's going to be rare that you actually don't want a `~const Destruct` bound.

Imo this relates closely to the discussions on linear types, and I'd rather take whatever solution comes up for that and reuse it for avoiding the need for the type to.

> Wouldn't that prevent const-ification of standard library traits? I.e. if we stabilize that (some) standard library traits imply `~const Destruct`, we won't be able to take that back.

yea, that's actually what may be the thing that would prevent us implying `~const Destruct`. will need to think some more on this

> We may offer an opt out of this behaviour in the future, if there are convincing real world use cases.

Reviewer 5: I proposed a possible solution in another thread, linking it here so it's easier to find: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1945774728

* you can add new methods with default bodies and don't have to worry about new kinds of breaking changes

The specific syntax given here may be confusing though, as it looks like the function is always const, but
implementations can use non-const impls and thus make the impl not usable for `T: ~const Trait` bounds.

Though this means that changing a non-const fn in the trait to a const fn is a breaking change, as the user may
have that previous-non-const fn as a non-const fn in the impl, causing the entire impl now to not be usable for
`T: ~const Trait` anymore.

See also: out of scope RTN notation in [Unresolved questions](#unresolved-questions)

## Per-method and per-trait constness together:

To get the advantages of the per-method constness alternative above, while avoiding the new kind of breaking change, we can require per-method and per-trait constness:

A mixed version of the above could be

```rust
const trait Foo {
    const fn foo();
    fn bar();
}
```

where you still need to annotate the trait, but also annotate the const methods.

But it makes it much harder/more confusing to add

```rust
trait Tr {
    const C: u8 = Self::f();
    const fn f() -> u8;
}
```

> later, where even non-const traits can have const methods, that all impls must implement as a const fn.

Reviewer 2: Another possible syntax is:

```rust
const trait Tr {
    // Must be `const` in all impls
    const fn foo();
    // Must be `const` in `const` impls
    ~const fn bar();
    // Never needs to be `const`
    fn baz();
}
```

This is analogous to the syntax for trait bounds.

A further possibility is to not require the `const` keyword in front of the trait for `impl`s, but instead infer based on the methods:

```rust
// This impl is `const`, because `fn bar()` is
impl trait Tr for () {
    const fn foo() {}
    const fn bar() {}
    fn baz() {}
}

// This impl is not `const`, because `fn bar()` is not
impl trait Tr for u32 {
    const fn foo() {}
    fn bar() {}
    fn baz() {}
}
```

Author: It seems very suprising to have such aggregate behaviour where individual method annotations change sth about the entire impl.

We have that for fields, but there's no precedent for impls and it seems a footgun

Reviewer 13: Depends how we interpret what `const Trait` means; we could mean it as "the methods can be called in a const context". This would solve the `~const Copy` issues because that would make `T: const Copy` and `T: Copy` equivalent.

Reviewer 2: In my proposal above, `const Trait` bounds are basically sugar for the RTN-like syntax discussed at e.g. https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1922775028. In my example above, bounding by `const Tr` is equivalent to defining a trait alias `trait ConstTr = Tr where Self::bar: const;`, and then bounding by `ConstTr`.

Reviewer 2: Arguably “it’s just an alias” also makes the feature easier to teach.

> It also imposes the limitation that a `const` trait must contain at least one `~const` function or bound.

Alternatively, we could allow it with a warning, so that a `const Trait` bound for a `const trait` with no `~const` in its definition is equivalent to the bare `Trait` bound.

Reviewer 14: By first syntax it seems that there is no need to mark a trait as `const`, since `fn` methods' default bodies are unnecessary to being const.

Reviewer 2: One question with my proposal is how to handle default method bodies whose constness depends on that of other methods, like all the `Iterator` helpers. Here, I imagine that `~const` bounds on a method declaration would be considered to apply to the default impl. So, for example, `count()` from `Iterator` would be declared as `~const fn count(self) -> usize where Self: ~const Iterator { /* ... */ }`. (This requires [coinduction](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/solve/coinduction.html).)

Going further, Perhaps `where ~const` could be added as a shorthand for `where Self: ~const TheTraitBeingDefined`. So our `count()` declaration could be written `~const fn count(self) -> usize where ~const { /* ... */ }`.

Reviewer 2: Most of my suggestions here were adopted. This thread should be resolved in favor of https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1985279156 and https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1985280055.

It must always be possible to call `default` outside of const contexts with no limitations on the generic parameters that may be passed.

Similarly it should be possible to write `compile_time_default` in a way that also requires calls
outside of const contexts to only pass generic parameters whose `Default::default` method satisifies
the usual `const fn` rules. This is necessary in order to allow a const block
(which can access generic parameters) in the function body to invoke methods on the generic parameter.

So, we need some annotation that differentiates a `T: Default` bound from one that gives us the guarantees we're looking for.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

## Nomenclature and new syntax concepts

### Const trait methods

Traits can declare methods as `const`. Doing so is a breaking change, as all impls are now required to provide a `const` method,
which existing impls can't.

```rust
trait Trait {
    const fn method();
}
```

These methods need to be implemented as `const`:

```rust
impl Trait for Type {
    const fn method() {}
}
```

### Const trait bounds

> Any item that can have trait bounds can also have `const Trait` bounds.

Reviewer 15: Is it allowed to write `const Trait` or `[const] Trait` bounds when `Trait` is not declared `#[const_trait]`/`[const]`?

For example:

```rust
trait Foo {}

const fn bar<F>()
where
    F: [const] Foo,  // <-- Is this an error?
{}
```

I ask because currently the `const_trait_impl` feature on nightly does require `#[const_trait]` in order to write `const` and `[const]` bounds. So currently the example would fail to compile on nightly with something like:

```
error: `[const] can only be applied to `#[const_trait]` traits
```

I wasn't clear whether this is the intended behavior, or just an unstable feature being unstable. The quoted sentence here makes it sound to me like the bound should be allowed. But I think it's kind of ambiguous, because it could also be interpreted as only talking about syntax.

I understand that `const Trait` *impls* require `Trait` to be declared `[const]`, which helps ensure forward compatibility. But I don't think that concern would carry over to `const Trait` and `[const] Trait` bounds&mdash;they would just be trivially unsatisfiable. I think allowing this would be very useful to library authors, who could write `[const] Trait` bounds on traits from external crates while still supporting older versions of the external crate where `Trait` isn't declared `[const]` yet.

Reviewer 2: The sentence applies to the item the trait bound is applied to, not the trait definition. The currently implemented behavior matches the RFC’s intent.

Reviewer 15: It would also simplify life for macro writers, in a similar way to [`allow_trivial_constraints`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/2056-allow-trivial-where-clause-constraints.md).

Author: ```rust
trait Foo {
    fn foo<T: Bar>(); 
}
```

Cannot be implemented without the trait being marked, as otherwise you are making a decision for the trait author as to whether that bound is not const or conditionally const

There's lots of semver issues around that, I'm gonna add a section, but TLDR is "not possible for traits with generic methods, associated type bounds or super traits other than Sized"

Reviewer 9: That's not what they were tasking about though? They were asking about bounds, not impls:
```rust
trait Foo { ... }

// Forbidden
impl const Foo for ... { ... }

// Could be allowed?
const fn bar<T: [const] Foo>(x: T) { ... }
```

Reviewer 4: To elaborate on the semver issue, let's say we allowed `T: [const] Foo` on a non-`#[const_trait]` `Foo`, and you have the following setup:

```rust
// upstream library
trait Foo {
    fn foo<T: Bar>(); 
}

// downstream crate
const fn bar<T: [const] Foo>(x: T) {
	T::foo::<()>();
}
```

The idea of making const traits opt-in per trait is to allow any trait to migrate to a const_trait without it being a breaking change. So the upstream crate author can change their trait into

```rust
#[const_trait]
trait Foo {
    fn foo<T: [const] Bar>(); // <- notice the requirement became more strict here 
}
```

without it breaking downstream users since no one was able to use it before.

If we allowed `T: [const] Foo` without `Foo` being a const_trait, the change upstream would be a breaking change.

Reviewer 3: No, it should not be allowed.

First, consider supertraits.  When the trait author opts-in the trait, the author gets a one-time chance to add (or not add) `[const]` to each supertrait bound.  Until the trait opts-in, we don't know what `T: [const] Tr` implies about the constness of its supertraits.

Second, consider if we were to allow trait defs where not all functions were `[const]` -- i.e., some could be opted out with `do()` or whatnot.  Then, once again, the trait author gets a one-time chance to decide, when opting-in the trait, which functions will be `[const]` and which will not.  Until the author makes that decision, we can't know what functions can be called in a const context given `T: [const] Tr`.

Reviewer 15: Yes, and hopefully I can clarify my point about crates. Suppose we have the following two crates:

#### Crate base v4.5
```rust
// lib.rs
pub trait Trait {
    fn compute(self) -> u32;
}
```

#### Crate dependent v1.2
```rust
// lib.rs
// Nothing relevant yet...
```
```toml
# Cargo.toml
[dependencies]
base = "4.0"
```

There's discussion that `base::Trait` is going to become `[const]` in the next minor version of base, which dependent wants to use in a new const fn. If they can write `[const] base::Trait` bounds, they're good to go.

#### Crate dependent v1.3
```rust
// lib.rs
pub const fn use_trait<T>(t: T) -> u32
where
    T: [const] base::Trait
{
    T::compute(t)
}
```
```toml
# Cargo.toml
[dependencies]
base = "4.0"  # Unchanged
```

And then at some point base 4.6 gets released.

#### Crate base v4.6
```rust
// lib.rs
pub [const] trait Trait {
    fn compute(self) -> u32;
}
```

Crates downstream of base and dependent can update their lock files to pull in the latest minor versions and call `dependent::compute` in const contexts where a const impl exists. Or, if they stick with base 4.5, they can only call `dependent::compute` in runtime contexts.

---

If it were not allowed to use `const`/`[const]` bounds on non-`[const]` traits, then dependent would have to wait for base 4.6 to be released, update its required base version to 4.6, and release a new *major* version.

Since developers don't like to waste major versions, dependent may hold their release even after base 4.6 is released, until some other larger changes are ready to ship. Downstream crates will have to wait, and then they'll have to update their own required *dependent* versions, rippling the traffic jam onward.

Reviewer 4: > If it were not allowed to use `const`/`[const]` bounds on non-`[const]` traits, then dependent would have to wait for base 4.6 to be released, update its required base version to 4.6, and release a new _major_ version.

Why? You're bumping the requirement of base from `4.5` to `4.6`. Why do you think that's a breaking change?

Reviewer 15: @fee1-dead: Sorry, I deleted the comment that you're responding to because it was very long and didn't add much. (I didn't think it had been up long enough for people to notice and respond!)

Reviewer 4: .. was in the middle of responding but you deleted it, here's one additional example:

Let's say we stabilize const traits before iterators were made const.

```rust
trait Iterator {
	type Item;
    fn cloned<'a, T: 'a>(self) -> Cloned<Self>
    where
        Self: Sized + Iterator<Item = &'a T>,
        T: Clone,
    {
        Cloned::new(self)
    }
}
```

This change is surely breaking, and we have to release libcore v2.0 then:

```rust
#[const_trait]
trait Iterator {
	type Item;
    fn cloned<'a, T: 'a>(self) -> Cloned<Self>
    where
        Self: Sized + [const] Iterator<Item = &'a T>,
        T: [const] Clone,
    {
        Cloned::new(self)
    }
}
```

.. as there are already downstream people writing this:

```rust
pub const fn cloned<I: [const] Iterator<Item = &'a T>, T: Clone>(x: I) -> Cloned<I>
{
	x.cloned()
}
```

Because we didn't disallow using `[const]` on a non-const trait.

So disallowing it is better.

Reviewer 15: Ok, I think I follow. @fee1-dead's example really drove it home for me.

So you really can't be allowed to &ldquo;observe&rdquo; `const Trait` or `[const] Trait` until `Trait` is `#[const_trait]`&mdash;neither to provide an impl nor as a bound. Changing existing bounds in `Trait` into `[const]` bounds changes `Trait`'s interface in const contexts, and we must preserve room for trait authors to do that when adding `#[const_trait]`.

Reviewer 16: the `[const]`-ness of a associated type's bounds is neither implied nor required by the well-formedness of that associated type. Instead, when you prove something using a `[const]` item bound of a (rigid) associated type, it requires that the `[const]` `where` clauses of that GAT hold, since we assume those bounds hold when proving the item bounds are well-formed.

I designed it that way to ensure that the well-formedness of a type was not dependent on the constness of the environment where it was named, and because it would overly complicate well-formedness for basically no benefit.

Reviewer 2: > ```rust
> #[const_trait]
> trait A {
>     type Target where Self: [const] Clone;
> }
> ```
>
> nevermind, I have been told that the code block above is supposed to work.

This is really surprising to me. I think it is the wrong behavior, and that the `where` clause on the associated type should be rejected. The `const` version of a trait should always be more powerful than its non-`const` counterpart. If `<T as Trait>::some_item` is valid, and `T: const Trait` holds, then `<T as const Trait>::some_item` must be valid as well. `[const]` bounds should not be allowed on associated types or consts. (Forbidding this is a natural consequence of my preferred [const traits model](https://hackmd.io/45KvFLBbS_utAtO4vPVBYA?view), which I intend to turn into a properly motivated proposal at some point.)

Reviewer 5: I think some kind of `const Trait` bound should be allowed on associated types and consts, since otherwise we couldn't express the imo reasonable to have with `const` defaults:
```rust
trait Tr {
    type T: const Default + const Into<usize>;
    const C: usize = T::default().into();
}
```
or what I hope we get a some later point:
```rust
trait Tr {
    type T1: const Default + const Into<usize>;
    type T2: Into<[u8; T1::default().into()]>;
    const C: &'static [u8; T1::default().into()];
}
```

Reviewer 2: > I think some kind of `const Trait` bound should be allowed on associated types and consts, since otherwise we couldn't express the imo reasonable to have with `const` defaults

`const Trait` bounds on those items are fine. They have many uses (as you mention), and don’t break the property I listed. It is only `[const]` bounds on these items that I object to.

Reviewer 2: @chrisbouchard That’s a good example, thanks! I guess I have to amend my statement: `[const]` should be forbidden *in the `where` clauses* of these items. In your example, the `[const] Input` bound is not in a `where` clause, so it doesn’t break the property I listed earlier, and should be allowed. (I had never really thought about the fact that `type Assoc: Supertrait;` and `type Assoc where Self::Assoc: Supertrait;` mean different things. Would make a nice question for dtolnay's Rust Quiz, if it doesn't already have one…)

Reviewer 15: @Jules-Bertholet Hmmm. Again, I feel like [const] bounds in associated items' where clauses could be useful, but I haven't fully thought it through yet.

Could you express something like

```rust
[const] trait Trait<T> {
    type Collection: [const] IntoIterator<Item=T>
    where
        <Self::Collection as IntoIterator>::IntoIter: [const] Iterator<Item=T>;
```

without a [const] bound in the where clause? (In a future where the iterator traits are [const].)

At least in this case, I think you could replace it with a second associated type

```rust
[const] trait Trait<T> {
    type Iter: [const] Iterator<Item=T>;
    type Collection: [const] IntoIterator<Item=T, IntoIter=Self::Iter>;
```

at the expense of a second associated type, which forces impls to spell out the iterator type.

(I suppose in this const iterator future `IntoIterator::IntoIter` may already be `[const] Iterator`, but not necessarily. E.g., you could construct an iterator at compile time that can only be iterated at runtime.)

I do feel like I see the outline of your concern, but I don't think I understand it fully. Could you share an example where a [const] bound in an item where clause makes `const Trait` surprisingly weaker than `Trait`? Thanks!

Reviewer 2: > Could you express something like
> 
> ```rust
> [const] trait Trait<T> {
>     type Collection: [const] IntoIterator<Item=T>
>     where
>         <Self::Collection as IntoIterator>::IntoIter: [const] Iterator<Item=T>;
> ```
>
> without a [const] bound in the where clause? 

Yes:

```rust
[const] trait Trait<T>
where
    <Self::Collection as IntoIterator>::IntoIter: [const] Iterator<Item=T>
{
    type Collection: [const] IntoIterator<Item=T>;
```

Reviewer 5: > Could you express something like
> 
> ```rust
> [const] trait Trait<T> {
>     type Collection: [const] IntoIterator<Item=T>
>     where
>         <Self::Collection as IntoIterator>::IntoIter: [const] Iterator<Item=T>;
> ```
> 
> without a [const] bound in the where clause?

or you could use the following, but it's not as general:
```rust
[const] trait Trait<T> {
    type Collection: [const] IntoIterator<Item = T, IntoIter: [const] Iterator<Item = T>>;
```

    * These are not part of this RFC because they require `const` function pointers. See [the Future Possibilities section](#future-possibilities).
* `impl const Trait` (in all positions).
    * These are not part of this RFC.
* `trait Foo: const Bar {}`, requiring every type that has an impl for `Foo` (even a non-const one), to also have a trait impl with `const` methods for `Bar`.
* `trait Foo { type Bar: const Trait; }`, requiring all the impls to provide a type for `Bar` that has a trait impl with `const` methods for `Trait`

Such an impl allows you to use the type that is bound within a const block or any other const context, because we know that the type has a trait impl with `const` methods and thus
must be executable at compile time. The following function will invoke the `Default` impl of a type at compile time and store the result in a constant. Then it returns that constant instead of computing the value every time.

```rust
fn compile_time_default<T: const Default>() -> T {
    const { T::default() }
}
```

### Conditionally const traits methods

> Traits need to opt-in to allowing their impls to have const methods. Thus you need to mark the trait as `[const]` and all the methods will become const callable.

Reviewer 17: It took me a while to understand _why_ this opt-in is needed, so here is a rewording suggestion that will make it more obvious:

```suggestion
Making a trait's methods callable in const contexts imposes extra constraints on their default implementations (if any).
Therefore, traits need to opt-in to allowing their impls to have const methods.
You need to mark the trait as `[const]` and all the methods will become const callable.
```

which we definitely do not support and have historically rejected over and over again.

### Impls with const methods for conditionally const trait methods

`const trait` impls for generic types work similarly to generic `const fn`.
Any `impl const Trait for Type` is allowed to have `[const]` trait bounds:

```rust
struct MyStruct<T>(T);

impl<T: [const] Add<Output = T>> const Add for MyStruct<T> {
    type Output = MyStruct<T>;
    fn add(self, other: MyStruct<T>) -> MyStruct<T> {
        MyStruct(self.0 + other.0)
    }
}

impl<T> const Add for &MyStruct<T>
where
    for<'a> &'a T: [const] Add<Output = T>,
{
    type Output = MyStruct<T>;
    fn add(self, other: &MyStruct<T>) -> MyStruct<T> {
        MyStruct(&self.0 + &other.0)
    }
}
```

See [this playground](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=313a38ef5c36b2ddf489f74167c1ac8a) for an example that works on nightly today.

### Derives

Most of the time you don't want to write out your impls by hand, but instead derive them as the implementation is obvious from your data structure.

```rust

> #[const_derive(PartialEq, Eq)]

Reviewer 18: This looks like a typo - you talk below (consistently) about `derive_const`, but this is `const_derive`.

a panic-freedom effect system or other effect systems in the future. This feature stands entirely on its own, and even if we came up with a general system for many effects that is (e.g. syntactically) better in the
presence of many effects, we'll want the syntax from this RFC as sugar for the very common and simple case.

## It's hard to make constness optional with `#[cfg]`

One cannot `#[cfg]` just the `const` keyword in `const Trait`, and even if we made it possible by sticking with `#[const_trait]` attributes, and also adding the equivalent for impls and functions,
`[const] Trait` bounds cannot be made conditional with `#[cfg]`. The only real useful reason to have this is to support newer Rust versions with a cfg, and allow older Rust versions to compile
the traits, just without const support. This is surmountable with proc macros that either generate two versions or just generate a different version depending on the Rust version.
Since it's only necessary for a transition period while a crate wants to support both pre-const-trait Rust and
newer Rust versions, this doesn't seem too bad. With a MSRV bump the proc macro usage can be removed again.

> # Alternatives

Reviewer 19: I think two important alternatives are missing from the alternatives section. While it is clear that
the team is set on the general direction, I think it's worth-while to at least mention them:

**Alternative I, automatic `const`**

We allow running any code at compile time, as long as it doesn't invoke
FFI/syscalls/target-specifific intrinsics, etc. Errors are moved from `const fn` declarations to
calls in `const` context.

**Alternative II, optimistic `const`**

Aka, the C++ approach. C++ also has `const` (called `constexpr`), but, as far am aware, they don't
have a second `[const]` modality. I _think_ this works becaues `constexpr` means that a function
"may" be const-evalable for some values of the arguments, not that it "must" be const-evalable for
all arrguments. Here's the litmus test example of the semantics:

```c++
#include <iostream>

constexpr int f(bool b) {
    if (b) std::cout << "See you at runtime!";
    return 92;
}

int g(bool b) {
    if (b) std::cout << "See you at runtime!";
    return 92;
}

constexpr int a = f(true);  // error
constexpr int b = f(false); // works (!!!)
constexpr int c = g(false); // error
```

---

I am a bit surpsised that these alternatives don't get at least _some_ considiration. They of course
push some of the semver checking from compiler to the human, but the benefit of semver checking
constness seems much less important than for trait checking, and doesn't allow separate
type-checking (you still have to actually _run_ consteval in the end of the day, and it still can
fail with division by zero or some such). In particular, C++ version does sound like it might be a sweat spot? It allows library authors to declare their intention, and to (conservatively) make functions as definitely-non-const, while avoiding the entire mechanism of const-conditionality.

Reviewer 19: > where in Rust everything is checked ahead of time rather than leaving it for later

This is not true for const generics/const fn.

```rust
fn foo<const N: u32>() -> u32 {
    const { N - 1 }
}

fn main() {
    foo::<1>(); 
    foo::<0>(); // Doesn't compile.
}
```

More generally, given `const X: u32 = some_function()`, you can’t really say whether this’ll work or not, you have to evaluate the function to check whether it terminates. `const` annotations doesn’t really change anything about this. 

It does seem to me that theres a very meaningful difference here in how traits and const fn s behave.

Reviewer: CC [@]fee1-dead's very good reply to [@]matklad's general proposal which was first posted on lobste.rs: https://lobste.rs/s/jslvmu/const_trait_counterexamples#c_ixouyi

Reviewer 19: >I also fail to see how to make Alternative II work for generic functions

Yeah, that's precisely the idea behind Alternative II, you don't _try_ to express that a function is always callable at compile time, you can only express the negative, that the function is _never_ callable at compile time. e This certainly _can_ lead to failures, but it seems to me that:

* The failures generally won't be semver regressions (which we _can_ get in Alternative I). You'll ultimately fail because somewhere some leaf function isn't annotated `constexpr`, which is an explicit and syntactically marked decision by a library author.
* I would expect these kinds of failures to be relatively rare, going from const to non-const by accident is possible, but doesn't feel like it'd be typical.
* I actually don't think messages would be hard to debug? My experience is that understanding an execution backtrace is generally easier than understanding compile-time errors involving traits. Trait errors are better than panics because you get them at compile time, but, in this case, either kind of error is at compile time. 

  It's also worth weighing getting error when the code doesn't compile vs heavier annotation burden for code that does compile. 

I don't claim that Alternative I or Alternative II are a better design (they _do_ seem that to me, but I haven't actually put the effort into trying to exhaustively enumerate implications of both), but it seems important to reflect the kinds of tradeoffs they raise in the RFC text. In particular, I am very surprised that it was only yesterday that I've learned that Alternative II is a point in the design space at all.

Reviewer 9: > Those errors in function logic are separate from "this pile of code was never designed to be callable from compile time to begin with", 

Yeah, that's why we should definitely error immediately when entering a non-`const fn` during const eval.

The assumption @matklad is challenging is whether we truly have to ensure this property *statically* (before const-eval even begins), or whether it is enough to check this *dynamically* (during const-eval, when we know which function will actually be called).

This is similar to the difference between C++ templates and Rust traits. Rust is doing really well with its traits, so thus far this has definitely been the right call. But is the tradeoff truly the same for the "const or not" distinction?

Reviewer 19: Yup! And I especially want to focus not only on _similarities_ with traits, but on differences as well. With traits, you really do get separate type-checking, the type-level effects of the function are encapsulated by its signature. With `const fn`, you have to evaluate the body anyway, and the resulting _value_ is what escapes into compile time/type world. In other words, with traits, we get:

1. Ability to speak about the "shape" of types, which is important for documentation and mental-model building
2. Separate type-checking, which is important for performance
3. _Strictly_ declaration-site error-checking
4. And, as a bonus, we mechanism semver checks. 

With const-fn, it feels like we only get `4`, which shifts the balance of tradeoffs.

Reviewer 5: I think we should try to avoid what happens in Python where you pass in some object and you only figure out that the object didn't support what you need when you run it and hit some corner case, or even worse, your library needs a particular interface but doesn't use every part of it, but a later version does use the rest of it, but now that breaks all your users who were just passing in objects that implemented only whatever the previous version of your library used.

Reviewer 20: As a C++ person that was sent a link to this discussion, having to put `constexpr` on everything is annoying. And imagining a definition checked C++ where you not only have to mark the function as `constexpr` but also the constraints is even more annoying.

C++ has reached a point where essentially everything is `constexpr` as long as it is defined in a header, doesn't access global state, and doesn't call C functions. You can (and should, if you're a library author) write a lot of C++ code that is `constexpr`. As someone who primarily writes library code at work, I don't remember the last time I have written a non-constexpr non-template function.

If Rust compile-time execution follows the C++ trajectory, even more Rust code can be `const` than C++ code `constexpr`: Global variable access is `unsafe` and thus discouraged, and you don't have header/source files, so that limitation doesn't exist either. I'd bet in 5-10 years, Rust library developers are as annoyed with mandatory `const` annotations as C++ library developers are right now with the `constexpr` annotations.

I'm not involved in Rust, but I'd recommend that you explore the Alternative Ⅱ or even Ⅰ. Yes, the accidental semver violations are scary, but that problems also exist for something else—access to OS APIs. I made this argument five years ago in the C++ world (https://www.foonathan.net/2020/10/constexpr-platform/), but I'd argue that long-term `const` should be treated just like e.g. Windows-specific functions should be treated, as a platform a crate can or cannot target. You don't have a `windows` annotation on functions that can be executed on Windows, and executing a function that isn't marked `windows` on Windows is impossible, because what if a future version wants to use Linux specific APIs? A crate just documents that it works on Windows.

Long term, once almost all Rust code can be executed at compile-time, you want to treat it just like any other platform you can execute Rust code on. Having to put mandatory annotations on everything at that point just means that the keyword to introduce a function is no longer `fn` but `const fn`.

Anyways, just my unsolicited 2cts.

    * New RTN-like per-method bounds: `T: Trait<some_fn(_): [const]>`.
        * Unclear if soundly possible.
        * Unclear if possible without incurring significant performance issues for all code (may need tracking new information for all functions out there).
        * Still requires editing traits.
        * Still want the `[const] Trait` sugar anyway.

## Should we start out without `const Trait` bounds

We do not need to immediately allow using methods on generic parameters of const fn, as a lot of const code is nongeneric.

The following example could be made to work with just const traits and const trait impls.

```rust
struct MyStruct(i32);

impl PartialEq for MyStruct {
    const fn eq(&self, other: &MyStruct) -> bool {
        self.0 == other.0
    }
}

const fn foo() {
    let a = MyStruct(1);
    let b = MyStruct(2);
    if a == b {}
}
```

Things like `Option::map` or `PartialEq` for arrays/tuples could not be made const without const trait bounds,
as they need to actually call the generic `FnOnce` argument or nested `PartialEq` impls.

> # Future possibilities

Reviewer 21: Since this RFC proposes the `Destruct` trait, it might be appropriate to mention allowing `?Destruct` without `const`[^1] as a future possibility.

[^1]: for example, opting out of `Destruct` in favor of a future `async Destruct`, or having a type require some other data to be dropped

- Feature Name: `const_trait_methods`
- Start Date: 2024-12-13
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#67792](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/67792)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Make trait methods callable in const contexts. This includes the following parts:

* Allow marking `trait` declarations as const implementable.
* Allow marking `trait` impls as `const`.
* Allow marking trait bounds as `const` to make methods of them callable in const contexts.

> Fully contained example ([Playground of currently working example](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=2ab8d572c63bcf116b93c632705ddc1b)):

Reviewer 3: If we mean to allow this with RPIT and APIT, we probably want to add an example of this here also.

```rust
trait Default {
    (const) fn default() -> Self;

> }

Reviewer 3: It's important to highlight somewhere that the intended intuition behind the parentheses in this position is that what's in them is tied to the associated effect.  Following from this, @nikomatsakis and I mean to allow this as well:

```rust
impl Default for () {
    () fn default() {}
}
```

And for that matter:

```rust
trait Default {
    () fn default() -> Self;
}

These have the same semantics as if the `()` wasn't there.

We're not suggesting that we're necessarily going to encourage this, simply that we want to allow it for consistency and pedagogy.  When teaching people, using this form is part of our plan for helping people to really see what's going on.

So anyway, we should mention somewhere in the RFC that this syntax is allowed.

Author: We could lint against it, but disable the lint in macros. Then ppl can write macros that pick const or not easily

Reviewer 3: Good point about it being good for macros.

Author: This syntax has problems for future `(const) fn()` pointers, as these are types the parser will parse `() fn()` as unit followed by more characters. I'm just not gonna support this and we can discuss it in the future

outside of const contexts to only pass generic parameters whose `Default::default` method satisifies
the usual `const fn` rules. This is necessary in order to allow a const block
(which can access generic parameters) in the function body to invoke methods on the generic parameter.

So, we need some annotation that differentiates a `T: Default` bound from one that gives us the guarantees we're looking for.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

## Nomenclature and new syntax concepts

### Const trait methods

Traits can declare methods as `const`. Doing so is a breaking change, as all impls are now required to provide a `const` method,
which existing impls can't.

```rust
trait Trait {
    const fn method();
}
```

These methods need to be implemented as `const`:

```rust
impl Trait for Type {
    const fn method() {}
}
```

### Const trait bounds

Any item that can have trait bounds can also have `const Trait` bounds.

Examples:

* `T: const Trait`, requiring any type that `T` is instantiated with to have a trait impl with `const` methods for `Trait`.

> * `dyn const Trait`, requiring any type that is unsized to this dyn trait to have a trait impl with `const` methods for `Trait`.

Reviewer 9: Just to be sure, this means that *all* methods (those declared `fn` and `const fn` in `Trait`) must be `const` in the `impl`?

    * These are not part of this RFC because they require `const` function pointers. See [the Future Possibilities section](#future-possibilities).
* `impl const Trait` (in all positions).
    * These are not part of this RFC.
* `trait Foo: const Bar {}`, requiring every type that has an impl for `Foo` (even a non-const one), to also have a trait impl with `const` methods for `Bar`.
* `trait Foo { type Bar: const Trait; }`, requiring all the impls to provide a type for `Bar` that has a trait impl with `const` methods for `Trait`

Such an impl allows you to use the type that is bound within a const block or any other const context, because we know that the type has a trait impl with `const` methods and thus
must be executable at compile time. The following function will invoke the `Default` impl of a type at compile time and store the result in a constant. Then it returns that constant instead of computing the value every time.

```rust
fn compile_time_default<T: const Default>() -> T {
    const { T::default() }
}
```

### Conditionally const traits methods

> Traits need to opt-in to allowing their impls to have const methods. Thus you need to prefix the methods you want to be const callable with `(const)`:

Reviewer 2: I think `(const)` is a step-down from `~const`.

`type Foo = (i32);` is equivalent to `type Foo = i32;` and `let x = (7)` is the same as `let x = 7`—there is a prior expectation that freestanding parentheses are just for grouping and don’t change the meaning of the contained construct. `(const)` breaks this expectation, which is misleading and confusing for users.

In contrast, `~` has a natural connotation of “maybe” or “sort of”, which is quite close to the concept being conveyed. It’s a natural fit. In my view, users having to learn a new sigil is preferable to users having to learn a confusing new overloaded meaning for an existing sigil.

Author: Quoting myself

> I'm gonna die on the hill that I support whatever gets landed faster

Reviewer 2: Also: parentheses-around-`const` has another potential meaning.

Consider this function:

```rust
const fn foo<T: Bar>(x: T) -> impl Baz {
    /* ... */
}
```

Imagine we wanted to specify that the return type should be `const Baz` if and only if `T: const Bar`. One potential syntax would be:

```rust
const fn foo<T: Bar>(x: T) -> impl (const where T: const Bar) Baz {
    /* ... */
}
```

Reviewer 3: Under this RFC it'd be:

```rust
const fn f<T: (const) A>(x: T) -> impl (const) B { x }
```

This works in nightly (under the old syntax).

[Playground link](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2024&code=%2F%2F+This+demonstrates+the+behavior+of+%60~const%60+bounds+with+respect+to%0A%2F%2F+RPIT.%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+See%3A%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+-+https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Frust-lang%2Frfcs%2Fpull%2F3762%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+Author%3A+TC%0A%2F%2F+Date%3A+2025-03-08%0A%0A%23%21%5Bfeature%28const_trait_impl%29%5D%0A%0A%23%5Bconst_trait%5D%0Atrait+A+%7B%7D%0A%23%5Bconst_trait%5D%0Atrait+B+%7B%7D%0A%0Aimpl%3CT%3A+~const+A%3E+const+B+for+T+%7B%7D%0A%0Aconst+fn+f%3CT%3A+~const+A%3E%28x%3A+T%29+-%3E+impl+~const+B+%7B+x+%7D%0A%0Afn+main%28%29+%7B%7D%0A)

For me, this argues in the opposite direction of your point.  We could see the above as equivalent to this:

```rust
const fn f<T: A>(x: T) -> impl (const where T: const A) B { x }
```

And we could say that we're treating that bound as the default in the presence of the earlier `T: (const) A` bound and are eliding it.  That is, the parentheses seem actually more scalable in this way, as if we did later want to extend them with some kind of more explicit syntax like this, it seems we could probably do that.

Reviewer 2: > Under this RFC it'd be:
> 
> ```rust
> const fn f<T: (const) A>(x: T) -> impl (const) B { x }
> ```
> 
> This works in nightly (under the old syntax).
> 
> [Playground link](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2024&code=%2F%2F+This+demonstrates+the+behavior+of+%60~const%60+bounds+with+respect+to%0A%2F%2F+RPIT.%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+See%3A%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+-+https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Frust-lang%2Frfcs%2Fpull%2F3762%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+Author%3A+TC%0A%2F%2F+Date%3A+2025-03-08%0A%0A%23%21%5Bfeature%28const_trait_impl%29%5D%0A%0A%23%5Bconst_trait%5D%0Atrait+A+%7B%7D%0A%23%5Bconst_trait%5D%0Atrait+B+%7B%7D%0A%0Aimpl%3CT%3A+~const+A%3E+const+B+for+T+%7B%7D%0A%0Aconst+fn+f%3CT%3A+~const+A%3E%28x%3A+T%29+-%3E+impl+~const+B+%7B+x+%7D%0A%0Afn+main%28%29+%7B%7D%0A)

No it isn’t, that means something different. In you example, when `T: const A` does not hold, `f()` cannot be used in `const` at all. In my example, `foo()` is *always* a `const fn`, and *only* the `const`ness of the `Baz` impl of the return type depends on the `const`ness of the `Bar` impl of the input.

Reviewer 2: My hypothetical parenteses syntax also has other applications, that would conflict even more with what this RFC proposes. For example:

```rust
(const where T: Baz) fn foo<T: Bar>(_: T) { /* ... */ }
```

Of course, there are ways to resolve the conflict. For example, we could use angle brackets instead: 

```rust
<const where T: Baz> fn foo<T: Bar>(_: T) { /* ... */ }
```

But having two types of brackets with different meanings in the same position would certainly be confusing. (Hopefully, this syntax should be very rare, as `(const)`/`~const` should suffice the overwhelming majority of cases. But that just means it will be more ufamiliar when encountered.)

Reviewer 3: > In my example, `foo()` is _always_ a `const fn`, and _only_ the `const`ness of the `Baz` impl of the return type depends on the `const`ness of the `Bar` impl of the input.

OK, fair.  But at that point, to achieve that level of control, I'd prefer to just spell the generic effect parameter explicitly, e.g.:

```rust
const fn f<effect K: (), T: A do K>(x: T) -> impl (B do K) { x }
```

This reads, "the generic effect parameter `K` must be a subset of the default set of effects, which is spelled `()`.  The default set today is `(runtime, panic, etc.)`.  The associated effect `<impl B as B>::Effect` on the output opaque will have the same set of effects as the associated effect `<T as A>::Effect` on the input."

Reviewer 3: > My hypothetical parenteses syntax also has other applications...

As a procedural note, probably your proposal isn't going to get a lot of consideration as just a tangent on this PR.  I'd probably suggest that if you're looking for that, that you flesh out its specification and motivation and whatnot and write it up more fully somewhere, e.g. in a HackMD document, and circulate it over in a thread on `t-lang/effects` on Zulip.  Then, perhaps the write-up could be used to add an alternative to this RFC, or if you get a warm response, for an RFC of its own.

Reviewer 2: I don’t know if my hypothetical `(const where ...)` syntax is a good idea. Though I believe we will likely need *some* way to express these nuances, but I have no strong opinions about what that should be. The only reason I brought it up was to point out the danger of `(const)` restricting our future options by using up the most common grouping construct (parentheses) unnecessarily.

Reviewer 2: > But at that point, to achieve that level of control (and more), I'd prefer to just spell the generic effect parameter explicitly anyway, e.g.:
> 
> ```rust
> const fn f<effect K: (), T: A do K>(x: T) -> impl (B do K) { x }
> ```
> 
> This reads, "the argument to the generic effect parameter `K` must be a subset of the default set of effects, which is spelled `()`.  The default set today is `(runtime, panic, etc.)`.  The associated effect `<impl B as B>::Effect` on the output opaque will have the same set of effects as the associated effect `<T as A>::Effect` on the input.

OK, but that’s still not the same thing! In my example, I don’t want to commit to anything regarding effects like `panic`—only `const`/the runtime effect. The traits in question aren’t necessarily even parameterized by those other effects!

Reviewer 3: Yes, I know... I omitted this for simplicity, and because generally I think people would just want to pass along all the effects.  But we could write a WC bound to express what you want exactly.

Reviewer 2: > Generally I think people would just want to pass along all the effects.

I don’t. Again, the different traits might not even share the same set of effect parameters. And if this function is performing some sort of wrapping/unwrapping operation, then the wrapper might be using effects of its own.

Reviewer 2: > Generally I think people would just want to pass along all the effects.

I don’t. Again, the different traits might not even share the same set of effect parameters. And if this function is performing some sort of wrapping/unwrapping operation, then the wrapper might be using effects of its own.

Reviewer 3: Yes, I would like us to have a way to support all such cases.

Reviewer 2: There is a parallel with `Send` bounds here. E.g. it would also be nice to have something like

```rust
fn foo<T: Foo>(a: T) -> impl Foo + (Send where T: Send) {
   /* ... */
}
```

Reviewer 3: Yes, and similarly, a (difficult) alternative would be generic trait parameters, which is essentially what this would be underneath.

Reviewer 2: Which, again, is not exactly the same thing, as my example is limited to only the `Send` trait, while a generic would accept many different potential trait combinations.

Reviewer 3: It all comes down to the bounds and how they work.  E.g.:

```rust
fn f<trait R: Send, T: Foo + R>() -> impl Bar + R { .. }
```

Read as, "the set of traits `R` must be a subset of the set `(Send,)`; that is, it must either be `(Send,)` or the empty set."

Reviewer 3: With effects, what you want exactly we could spell:

```rust
const fn f<effect K, T: A do K>() -> impl (B do K)
where
    const: K,
{ .. }
```

Read as, "the set of effects `const`, which is an alias for `() - runtime` -- that is, the default set of effects except `runtime` -- must be a subset of the set of effects `K`.  In other words, `K` must either be the default or be `const`.  Since effects are subject to subtyping, any input type `T` implementing `A` with fewer effects (e.g. without `panic`) will still be accepted (as desired), but the output opaque will not make a guarantee any stronger than `const`."

Conversely, if we instead decided that we'd express all effects in the negative (like `const`, `nopanic`, etc.), then maybe we'd instead think in terms of "sets of negative effects", and then we could spell that as:

```rust
const fn f<effect K: const, T: A do K>(x: T) -> impl (B do K) { x }
```

Read as, "the set of negative effects `K` must be a subset of the set `(const,)` -- that is, must be either `const` or the empty set.  As above, subtyping applies to effects, so the input may have additional negative effects, but these will not be part of the guarantee made on the output opaque type."

Reviewer 9: > (As we can see in that second example there, we sometimes tie the parentheses together, such that they're all meant to be toggled as a unit, which is something else that we're doing here.)

This would be true if it was `(const) fn foo<T: (const) Default>`, but the analogy is broken without the parentheses around the first `const`.

Reviewer 2: @traviscross In your hypothetical effect/trait generics syntax, how would you handle a case like https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1986361892, where constness depends on a trait bound (or the other way around, where a trait bound depends on constness)?

Also, would you expect these generic parameters to be early or late-bound?

Reviewer 3: > > (As we can see in that second example there, we sometimes tie the parentheses together, such that they're all meant to be toggled as a unit, which is something else that we're doing here.)
> 
> This would be true if it was `(const) fn foo<T: (const) Default>`, but the analogy is broken without the parentheses around the first `const`.

Yes, and this is why I had wanted to do that (with `~const fn`) originally, but it ends up being a bad trade because it's better to use the item-level syntax space to tie it to the associated effect.

So, I agree that makes the analogy less clear, but it is still there piecewise.  That is, the analogy holds in the bound space, and it holds in the item space, but it doesn't hold between them.

Reviewer 9: I'm sorry you completely lost me here. How does the "item-level syntax space" tie anything to "the associated effect" (and associated with what)? How does the analogy "hold in the item space", what even is the "item space"?

We seem to agree that the analogy does not hold in
```rust
const fn default<T: (const) Default>() -> T
```
which means I think the analogy is dead in the water; any attempt at teaching const traits with this analogy will cause more confusion than it helps. You can make any curved line seem straight by putting on a particularly shaped lense but that doesn't mean it is a valid claim to say that the line is straight...

Reviewer 9: Thinking about ti some more, maybe you are talking about making room for the following in the design space?
```rust
trait Tr {
  const fn foo<T: (const) Default>() -> T;
}
```
That is, we can have a function where all trait impls must ensure that it is const-callable if its trait bounds are const-satisfied. If we wrote `(const) fn` here that would mean only const impls have to ensure it is const-callable.

I'm not sure if anyone asked for such functions to exist. The alternative would be to entirely dispense with the idea that we can have always-const functions in a trait. Instead, we can only have sometimes-const functions, i.e., tied to the associated effect, and then leave it up to the user of the trait to bound the associated effect as they see fit.

Reviewer 9: Put differently: for a situation like the above, where we have *two* generic effects in scope (the associated effect of the trait, and the one that `foo` is generic over), I think we shouldn't try to shoehorn that into a "simple" syntax that leaves the effect generics implicit. Once there are two effect generics in scope, we should give them names and make things explicit; that will be a lot easier to explain & understand. We don't need the MVP to support this feature either, we can leave this as a possible future extension.

Reviewer 3: Yes, this is what it's about.  It's what we've been calling "always-maybe-const" vs "maybe-maybe-const", etc.  There's a pair of Zulip threads about this in t-lang/effects ("~const fn foo<T: ~const Default>()", "Thoughts on ~const 2024-02-19") that might be worth reviewing for background.  Suffice it to say, others feel strongly about spending the syntax in a way that covers all the quadrants here, and I'm also convinced this is the right thing to do.

In terms of teaching this, I do think there's a coherent story here.  If we think of the effect of some trait impl method as a union of the effects of other things, what's in that union?  Well, to start, all the `(const)` bounds on the method pull in their default associated effects.  Then, if the item is `(const)`, the default associated effect on the trait is added (and if the method is not `const` at all, then `runtime` is added).  And that default associated effect has in its bounds the associated effects of any `(const)` bounds from the impl header.  Then, any `T: (const) Tr` or `T: const Tr` bounds for this trait produce bounds on this default associated effect.

That is, the claim was that the parens suggest things are tied together, and they are.

Reviewer 9: > others feel strongly about spending the syntax in a way that covers all the quadrants here, and I'm also convinced this is the right thing to do.

I think the RFC needs to contain a summary of this rationale. RFCs are supposed to be reasonably self-contained. Having to justify an RFC's choices by pointing at a Zulip thread is not a good sign; it excludes people from the discussion that do not have the time to wade through mountains of Zulip discussions.

Also, this doesn't nearly cover all the quadrants, since it still bakes in the idea of a single associated effect per trait. Covering all quadrants would require named associated effects so that I can have multiple groups of functions that are "tied" to each other only within a group, unions of multiple affect variables, etc pp. Apparently the decision was made that *that* is too much complexity, and I agree, but this proposal is expending significant amounts of complexity for what I personally think is a feature that does not have to be part of the MVP.

Author: I don't actually know what is being asked of me here, can someone who does just open a PR against my RFC?

```rust
trait Trait {
    (const) fn thing();
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: I appreciate most of the changes made to where `const`/`(const)`/`~const` annotations need to be placed, as they parallel my proposal at https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1922855756. However, I think requiring the trait definition to say `const Trait  { /* .. */ }`/`const Trait { /* .. */ }` was valuable as documentation. One should not have to scroll through the entire list of methods in order to determine whether a trait can be `const`-qualified. Even though the compiler could infer this, I think users should have to write it out anyway.

Reviewer 5: one other issue with switching to only-methods-get-const is afaict it's incompatible with `const Sized` as proposed in #3729 since `Sized` has no methods, but that is a meaningful distinction since `size_of`'s `const`-ness depends on it.

Reviewer 2: @programmerjake I think the way to resolve that is that `size_of()` should be made a method of `Sized`.

Reviewer 22: Perhaps this is a silly idea, but couldn't size_of() instead be an associated const of Sized? Size is constant, it doesn't change at run time, as far as I am aware. (Adding this and then deprecating size_of<T>() wouldn't be a breaking change, which is an added bonus.)

Reviewer 23: I don't think having an associated const would work for the use case of https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3729 because it introduces the concept of types that whose size is not known at compile time (but have a consistent size for one execution), so their size can't be put in a `const` at compile time.

Reviewer 3: > I appreciate most of the changes made to where `const`/`(const)`/`~const` annotations need to be placed... However, I think requiring the trait definition to say `const trait Trait { /* .. */ }` was valuable as documentation.

One reason I'd prefer not to do this is that it's purely transitional.  If we were starting today, there'd be no reason for us to bifurcate the space of traits into const ones and not-const ones, just like how we didn't bifurcate traits into two spaces when we started allowing async items in traits.  There's a cost to this bifurcation, in terms of having to explain to people how we'd be overloading `(const)` or `const` in an additional and different way in this position.

The practical reason we need some flag here, implicit or not, is because once we allow `T: (const) Tr` bounds for some trait, the trait author can no longer backward-compatibly add `(const)` to existing supertrait or other WC bounds or to items.  But it seems fine to just tell people that when adding `(const)` at all to a trait that they're making this commitment, and only allow such bounds for traits that have done so.[^1]

For marker traits (with no `(const)` supertrait bounds) in the style of RFC 3729 `MetaSized`, we could simply use an attribute to opt-in the trait and to flag the impl (i.e. to set the associated effect explicitly).  Perhaps this attribute never actually needs to be stable, e.g. if the only real use-case for `(const)` on marker traits is RFC 3729.

And, as was mentioned above and was also mentioned in our design meeting discussion, setting aside for a moment path dependence and transition costs and whatnot, the really right answer would have been for `size_of` and `size_of_val` to be associated items on the relevant traits anyway, and it would probably make this all rather moot if we could in fact move to doing that.

[^1]: We could also, over an edition, decide to opt-in all traits by default.  That would remove the bifurcation entirely.  That's not part of this proposal, and probably I suspect that we'll be happy enough with the proposed rule that we won't need to do that anytime soon.

Reviewer 2: > If we were starting today, there'd be no reason for us to bifurcate the space of traits into const ones and not-const ones, just like how we didn't bifurcate traits into two spaces when we started allowing async items in traits.

This analogy is flawed. I’m not proposing that traits with only always-`const` methods should be marked `const trait`, just as traits with always-`async` methods are not marked `async trait`. Only traits with maybe-`const` methods, such that `T: const Trait` bounds can be written, should require the annotation. In this case, the bifurcation already exists: either you can write that bound, or you can’t. Requiring `const trait` simply ensures that one can determine which category a trait belongs to in O(1) time from the definition, instead of O(n).

Reviewer 2: My mental model is that `const Trait` is syntax sugar for a trait alias. It’s approximately equivalent to

```rust
trait ConstTrait = Trait
where
    Self::method: const,
    Self::other_method: const;
```

The `const` in `const trait Trait` syntax declares this alias.

Reviewer 3: Yes... I knew someone would quibble with that first sentence by itself.  The second one and the second paragraph (and the footnote) were intended to address that.

What you're trying to clarify there is actually exactly why, in my view, marking the trait with e.g. `const trait` is going to increase confusion.  It's because we only need to flag the trait (for transitional reasons) in the "maybe" case and not in the "always" case.  So `const trait` doesn't actually mean "this trait has `const` methods", as a non-const trait might have all-const methods.  It instead means "this trait has associated effect parameters for its items and supports bounds tied to those".  And that's what we wouldn't distinguish if we were starting today -- the assumption would just be that all traits may have implicit associated effect parameters.

Further, the analogy given is better that it appears at first glance.  AFIT and RPITIT add implicit associated types to the traits, just like this adds implicit associated effects, and the consequences of this due to auto trait leakage (i.e. the `Send` bound problem) have a lot of overlap with the design problems here.  E.g., we talked about bifurcating the space of traits into `Send` traits and not-`Send` and maybe-`Send` traits and other such things (but did not do that, except via a [proc macro](https://github.com/rust-lang/impl-trait-utils)).

Reviewer 2: > for transitional reasons

I disagree with this. I think that, even were this feature to have been introduced prior to 1.0, it would still be valuable to distinguish between traits that can be `const`-parameterized and ones that can’t. For many traits, having two variants makes no sense. And even when it does make sense, it’s good to not force trait authors to commit until they are ready.

Reviewer 3: > For many traits, having two variants makes no sense

Not to pick too much on one sentence, as I'm sure you understand the underlying model, but I want to highlight it, as this specifically is exactly what we're not doing.  And corresponding, what would concern me about saying `const trait` is that it would suggest to people that is what's happening, when it's not.

To demonstrate what I mean, this (`Tr`) is a trait with two variants:

```rust
pub trait Tr<T: Tag> {}

pub trait Tag {}
impl Tag for u8 {}
impl Tag for u16 {}
```

That is, `Tr<u8>` and `Tr<u16>` are two variants of the `Tr<T>` trait.  Conversely, this is a trait without any variants:

```rust
pub trait Tr {
    type Ty: Tag;
}
```

Here, there is "only one trait".  I.e., the trait itself is not generic; there cannot be any variants of it, and correspondingly any single type can implement this trait only once (i.e. rather than once for each variant).

What we're doing, importantly, in this RFC is the effect equivalent of this second thing, not of the first.

If we were doing the first thing, then I'd agree that `const trait` or similar would make a lot of sense.

Reviewer 2: I meant “variant” in the same sense that [`trait-variant`](https://github.com/rust-lang/impl-trait-utils/tree/main/trait-variant) uses the term. Again, my mental model is that `const Trait` desugars to a trait alias, just like `SendTrait`.

Reviewer 3: Probably I'd frame `T: (const) Tr` as a bound, like `T: Tr<f(..): Tr>`, not as a trait alias.  If we did want to frame it as a trait alias, I'd frame it as a (generic) trait alias like this:

```rust
trait Tr {
    (const) fn f();
    (const) fn g();
}

// Desugars to:

trait __Tr {
    effect F;
    fn f() do Self::F;
    effect G;
    fn g() do Self::G;
}

trait Tr<effect Effect> = __Tr<F = Effect, G = Effect>
where
    const: Effect; // This is an upper bound.
```

(This uses the framing of "sets of positive effects" as described in https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1988530859.)

Then I'd say that we have syntactic sugar that converts `T: const Tr` to `T: Tr<Effect = const>`.

Then, for a trait without any `(const)` items, we'd desugar trivially as:

```rust
trait Tr {
    fn f();
    fn g();
}

// Desugars to:

trait __Tr {
    effect F;
    fn f() do Self::F;
    effect G;
    fn g() do Self::G;
}

trait Tr<effect Effect> = __Tr<F = (), G = ()>;
```

Here, because we have to let traits migrate -- to configure the associated effects in this trait alias before people start to use it -- we disallow the `T: (const) Tr` sugar.

Anyway, I hope you can see from this why I don't think there's such a big difference between these two traits -- in this model -- that it's worth overloading `const` (for `const trait`) to express this.

But, you know, opinions differ on this sort of thing.  If we did want to mark it somehow that the trait had opted-in, other than by the presence of `(const)`, I'd actually prefer to use an attribute or maybe some kind of dummy bound.

A `(const)` method's (optional) default body must satisfy everything a `const fn` body must, making them callable in const contexts.
Impls can now rely on the default methods being const, too, and don't need to override them with a const body.

Note that on nightly the syntax is

```rust
#[const_trait]
trait Trait {
    fn thing();
}
```

and a result of this RFC would be that we would remove the attribute and add the `(const) fn` syntax for *methods*.
Free functions are unaffected and will stay as `const fn`.

### Impls for conditionally const methods

Methods that are declared as `(const)` on a trait can now be made `const` in an impl:

```rust
impl Trait for Type {
    const fn thing() {}
}
```

> If a single `(const)` method is declared as `const` in the impl, all `(const)` methods must be declared as such.

Reviewer 9: To me this is the biggest weakness of the current proposal: this feels too magic / implicit. There is some sort of flag on a trait (so far expressed with `#[const_trait]`), and a flag on the impl (so far expressed with `const impl`), but the RFC proposes to instead infer that flag from the contents of the trait/impl block. I find this extremely hard to think about, and it also causes issues with marker traits as has already been mentioned elsewhere.

Usually, Rust prefers explicit over implicit. What is the reason for diverging from that theme here? At the very least, the RFC should list this as an alternative and discuss why it was discarded.

Reviewer 22: I agree that this feels weird. Altering a single method, and having it affect all others in the impl is not what I would expect. If every (const) method has to share the same const/non-const state, then it feels like it should be set in 1 location, not multiple.

(Also, sidenote, instead of making people split up traits to have multiple const/non-const states, perhaps we could have a way of defining multiple const/non-const states, and then methods can decide which const/non-const state to use?
```rust
trait Foo {
    // Shows an idea of potentially defaulting to const, should it not be specified,
    // and cannot be inferred from the methods (All methods in the impl using the default body.).
    // Although there would have to be a lint to warn against having a default
    // if it is impossible for an impl to use the default...
    maybe_const StateOne = const;
    maybe_const StateTwo;
    
    (const: StateOne) fn one();
    (const: StateOne) fn one_other();
    
    (const: StateTwo) fn two();
    // How would we handle default bodies?
    // Perhaps get them specify that they only exist when StateTwo is in a specific state?
    //(const: StateTwo) fn has_default() where StateTwo: const {}
}

impl Foo for () {
    // This idea falls apart even more here.
    // Manually setting this is pointless, as it will always be inferred from the method two.
    maybe_const StateTwo = non-const;

    const fn one() {}
    // Error: StateOne is const according to one, but non-const according to one_other.
    fn one_other {}

    const fn two() {}
}
```
Probably a terrible idea, but I enjoy throwing ideas at the wall, and seeing how sharp their broken fragments are.)

Reviewer 2: I say something similar in https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1985280055. However, I do think it’s important that any annotation on the `impl` be strictly optional. This ensures that implementers can start refining methods to be `const` without waiting on the trait definer, and then when the trait definer eventually updates, the new impl is instantly `const Trait` compatible.

Reviewer 9: > owever, I think it’s important that any annotation on the impl be strictly optional. This ensures that implementers can start refining methods to be const without waiting on the trait definer, 

As explained in https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1990800743 I don't think this is possible with the current proposal.

Reviewer 2: [As I said in response to your comment](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1991355907), my read of that restriction is that it is meant to be temporary, until https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/100706 is stable.

Reviewer 9: Oh, I did not realize that you meant to say it is temporary.

I would think if the RFC meant this to be temporary it would say so explicitly.

Author: If someone figures out sound refinement, that's OK. I'm not expecting it before sound specialization

Author: > We offer some way to assert to the compiler that an impl we are writing qualifies for a (const) Trait bounds, e.g. (const) impl Trait for Type.

I want this, but niko and TC do not. You have to convince them

Reviewer 2: > If someone figures out sound refinement, that's OK. I'm not expecting it before sound specialization.

Can you give an example of the potential unsoundness?

Author: you can't write stronger bounds on the method

```
trait Foo { fn foo<T: Bar>(); }

impl Foo for () { fn foo<T: const Bar>() { const { T::bar()} } }
```

Is obviously not OK

The more generic version

```
trait Foo { fn foo<T: Bar>(); }

impl Foo for () { const fn foo<T: (const) Bar>() { T::bar()} }
```

Is then a problem when the trait author goes

```
trait Foo { (const) fn foo<T: Bar>(); }
```

Basically whenever you do any "refinement" (const works the opposite from other refinement), you basically made the trait author never change their trait again.

I think this is only doable with full on associated effect support and per method bounds. And even then I'm not sure.

Author: Correcting myself: It's either unsound or a breaking change, and we'd obviously pick the latter

Reviewer 2: > Is then a problem when the trait author goes

Why? I fail to see the problem

Author: Because now as per the trait you can call this const fn without a type that implements the trait constly. But the impl says you need a const impl of Bar for whatever type T is monomorphized to. So the impls body will call method bar, at compile time, even though it is not const and contains random runtime code

Reviewer 2: Well, no, because the trait only says you can do that if the impl is a `const Foo` impl. But it doesn’t satisfy the requirements for that, so it’s not a `const Foo` impl (just a `Foo` impl with some refinements), so you can’t do it, so there’s no problem

Reviewer 3: > Is then a problem when the trait author goes...

Yes, it's a good point.  We certainly can't allow `(const)` bounds in the trait impl on parameters that appear in the trait def when the trait def doesn't have those bounds.

Reviewer 2: Again, this is only an issue if you assume that the `impl` must be `const Trait`. But there is no reason to assume that!

Reviewer 3: Yes, I mean specifically it can't be allowed under the proposed design and the model I've given elsewhere on this thread for it.

Reviewer 2: Why? Sorry, can you ELI5?

Reviewer 3: Note in your proposed semantic that after the trait migrates, that depending on the (backward compatible) decisions that the trait author makes, your impl could end up a bit stuck, because to migrate your impl to be const, you might have to drop that `(const)` bound which you were probably relying on.

That's a good enough reason for me to not to want to do that.

Reviewer 2: > Your impl could end up a bit stuck, because to migrate your impl to be const, you might have to drop that `(const)` bound which you were probably relying on.

That’s still a strictly better situation to be in than if you are completely unable to make the function `const`-compatible to any degree whatsoever.

Reviewer 3: > Why? Sorry, can you ELI5?

If a trait author writes:

```rust
pub trait A {
    type Ty;
    (const) fn g();
}

pub trait Tr {
    fn f<T: A>();
}
```

Then we write:

```rust
impl Tr for () {
    const fn f<T: (const) A>() {
        _ = <T as A>::g();
    }
}
```

Such that someone can write:

```rust
fn test<U: const A>() {
    _ = const { <() as Tr>::f::<U>() };
}
```

Now the trait author can backward-compatibly change `Tr` to:

```rust
pub trait Tr {
    (const) fn f<T: A>();
}
```

Now we have two problems.

One, in the model (see https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1988664888 and Niko's desugarings), our impl was already tying that associated effect to the constness of the impl item.  The trait opting-in now makes that associated effect accessible to bounds.  But our `T: (const) A` bound on the impl item is not a valid refinement of that revised trait item because it "offers less" to callers than the trait itself, in that the item can't be called in a const context with only `T: A`.  Boom.

Two, even if we could opt-out the impl somehow, as with:

```rust
#[non_const_impl]
impl Tr for () {
    const fn f<T: (const) A>() {
        _ = <T as A>::g();
    }
}
```

Then we still have a problem.  First, it muddies up the model, because we can't really say anymore that the constness of that impl item is always tied to the associated effect.  But worse, the impl can't migrate to being a const impl without dropping `(const)` from that `T: (const) A` bound, which means that it can't call `g` any longer.  So it's stuck.

Reviewer 2: IOW:

To implement `Tr`, an `impl` needs to provide a certain set of guarantees $X$. To implement `const Tr`, it needs to provide a strictly stronger set of guarantees $Z$. If an `impl Tr for ()` block uses refinement to provide a set of guarantees $Y$ that is stronger that $X$ but weaker than $Z$, then `()` implements `Tr` but not `const Tr`. And that’s OK.

If the compiler were to decide that `()` implemented `const Tr` even though the `impl` block did not provide $Z$, then that would be a bug in the compiler, and nothing more.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps it would be most helpful if you wrote out your proposal in terms of the desugaring to the [formality model](https://nikomatsakis.github.io/constantly-effective/formality.html).

Reviewer 2: > Perhaps it would be most helpful if you wrote out your proposal in terms of the desugaring to the [formality model](https://nikomatsakis.github.io/constantly-effective/formality.html).

I’ll try to do that.

Reviewer 2: @traviscross Here is a full description of my mental model for this feature: https://hackmd.io/@Jules-Bertholet/BkEksib2ye

Hopefully, it clears up some confusion.

Reviewer 3: I'd suggest we break up this discussion as follows:

- Whether to mark the trait, the impl, both, or neither.
- Whether we see this as a permanent distinction or a transitional one.
- What syntax to use for this indication.

Focusing on the marking of the trait, I'm OK with explicit syntactic indication in the current edition.  In fact, I somewhat prefer it for the reasons you mention.  But I see those reasons (and in particular the number 1 and 2 "pros" that you mention) as transitional, and over time, using editions, I'd like to wash out this distinction, and that leads me to prefer using an attribute for this.

For the marking of the impl, on the other hand, I'm OK with `impl const Trait`, as it matches the bound syntax and means an analogous thing.  This one does not seem transitional to me.

Reviewer 3: Continued in:

- https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762/files#r2022307712 for marking the trait.
- https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762/files#r2022327541 for marking impls.

Reviewer 9: (I'd recommend targeting links to the discussions to https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762 instead; links to the `files` page are extremely unstable as they will stop working when future pushes to this PR change the diff in a way that the discussion is not shown on the diff page any more.)

It is still completely fine to just declare no methods `const` and keep the existing behaviour. Thus adding `(const)`
methods to traits is not a breaking change. Only marking more methods as `(const)` if there are already some `(const)`

> methods is.

Reviewer 9: On other words, the "refinement" approach [suggested](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1990360320) by @traviscross has to be limited or else it prevents forward compatibility here.

> methods is.

Reviewer 2: I think this is a reflection of the fact that the RFC considers that refinement a [future possibility](https://github.com/oli-obk/rfcs/blob/const-trait-impl/text/0000-const-trait-impls.md#allow-impls-to-refine-any-traits-methods) rather than part of the main proposal. This is probably because `#![feature(refine)]` is still unstable.

> methods is.

Reviewer 3: Probably I wouldn't say this necessarily needs to be gated on `#![feature(refine)]`, since this mechanism is an implicit associated effect, and associated types, even the implicit ones for RPITIT and AFIT, are always refining in stable Rust today.

But yes, the mechanics I describe assume both this refinement and dropping the restriction you quote requiring that "if a single `(const)` method is declared as `const` in the impl, all `(const)` methods must be declared as such".

would mean "no const impl required, even if called in const context".

### Const fn

`const` fn have always been and will stay "always const" functions.

It may appear that a function is suddenly "not a const fn" if it gets passed a type that doesn't satisfy
the constness of the corresponding trait bound. E.g.

```rust
struct Foo;

impl Clone for Foo {
    fn clone(&self) -> Self {
        Foo
    }
}

const fn bar<T: (const) Clone>(t: &T) -> T { t.clone() }
const BAR: Foo = bar(Foo); // ERROR: `Foo`'s `Clone` impl is not for `const Clone`.
```

But `bar` is still a `const` fn and you can call it from a const context, it will just fail some trait bounds. This is no different from 

```rust
const fn dup<T: Copy>(a: T) -> (T, T) {(a, a)}
const FOO: (String, String) = dup(String::new());
```

Here `dup` is always const fn, you'll just get a trait bound failure if the type you pass isn't `Copy`.

This may seem like language lawyering, but that's how the impl works and how I believe we should be talking about it.

It's actually important for inference and method resolution in the nonconst world today.

> You first figure out which method you're calling, then you check its bounds.

Author: If it doesn't compile today without the const it won't compile in the future with it

their non-const equivalents, so you may have to add `(const)` bounds to other generic
parameters, too:

```rust
const fn foo<T: (const) Debug, F: (const) Fn(T)>(f: F, arg: T) {
    f(arg)
}

const fn bar<T: (const) Debug>(arg: T) {
    foo(baz, arg)
}

const fn baz<T: (const) Debug>() {}
```

For closures and them implementing the `Fn` traits, see the [Future possibilities](#future-possibilities) section.

## Crate authors: Making your own custom types easier to use

You can make trait impls of many standard library traits for your own types have `const` methods.
While it was often possible to write the same code in inherent methods, operators were
covered by traits from `std::ops` and thus not avaiable for const contexts.
Most of the time it suffices to add `const` before the methods in the impl block.
The compiler will guide you and suggest where to also
add `(const)` bounds for trait bounds on generic parameters of methods or the impl.

Similarly you can make your traits available for users of your crate to implement constly.
Note that this has two caveats that are actually the same:

* you cannot mark more methods as `(const)` later,

> * you must decide whether to make a new method `(const)` or not when adding a new method with a default body.

Reviewer 2: Could you add an example of a trait with a `(const)`/`~const` method, with a default body that calls other trait methods?

Reviewer 2: For example, the full definition of the `const`ified `PartialEq` trait.

* Appears to permit more behaviours than are desirable (multiple such parameters, math on these parameters, ...), so they need to be prevented, adding more checks.
* Is not necessary unless we'd allow much more complex kinds of bounds. So it can be kept open as a future possibility, but for now there's no need.
* Does not quite work in Rust due to the constness then being early bound instead of late bound, cause all kinds of problems around closures and function calls.
* Technically cause two entirely separate MIR bodies to be generated, one for where the effect is on and one where it is off. On top of that it then theoretically allows you to call the const MIR body from non-const code.

Thus that approach was abandoned after proponents and opponents cooperated in trying to make the generic parameter approach work, resulting in all proponents becoming opponents, too.

### Sites where `const Trait` bounds can be used

Everywhere where non-const trait bounds can be written, but only for traits that have `(const)` methods.

### Sites where `(const) Trait` bounds can be used

* `const fn`
* `(const) fn`
* trait impls of traits with `(const)` methods

> * NOT in inherent impls, the individual `const fn` need to be annotated instead

Reviewer 2: IIUC this does *not* match the model described by https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1990360320, correct?

Reviewer 3: Go on, why don't you think so?

Reviewer 2: My understanding of the model from your comment was that a `T: (const) Trait` bound on the `impl` block means that all `(const) fn`s inside the block are `const fn` when and only where `T: const Trait` is satisfied. There is no need to refer to the trait definition to apply this rule, therefore it should work even in inherent impls, or impls of traits with no `(const) fn` in the definition.

Reviewer 3: Have a look at the desugaring in Niko's write-up that I linked.  What matters here is that for the function to call a method on the `T: (const) Tr` from the impl header, the effect of the function ends up becoming tied to an associated effect on the trait that then ends up tied to the `T: (const) Tr` bound for that trait.  That's not at issue with an inherent impl, though admittedly it's a rather subtle point.

* `trait` declarations with `(const)` methods
    * super trait bounds
    * where bounds

>     * associated type bounds

Reviewer 3: What about RPIT?  I presume we mean to allow this, even within inherent impls.  E.g.:

```rust
struct S;
impl S {
    const fn f<T: (const) Tr>(x: T) -> impl (const) Tr { x }
}
```

This works on nightly.

Author: APIT is just syntax sugar ™️ 
I'll mention RPIT

Reviewer 3: Yes, agreed, RPIT was the main thrust there.

```

desugars to

```rust
fn compile_time_default<T>() -> T
where
    T: Default<do: const>,
{
    const { T::default() }
}
```

### `(const)` desugaring

In a-mir-formality

```rust
const fn default<T: (const) Default>() -> T {
    T::default()
}
```

desugars to

```rust
const fn default<T>() -> T
where
    T: Default,
    do: <T as Default>,
{
    T::default()
}
```

### Why not both?

```rust
const fn checked_default<T>() -> T
where
    T: const Default,
    T: (const) Default,
    T: (const) PartialEq,
{
    let a = const { T::default() };
    let b = T::default();
    if a == b {
        a
    } else {
        panic!()
    }
}
```

Has a redundant bound. `T: const Default` implies `T: (const) Default`, so while the desugaring will include both (but may filter them out if we deem it useful on the impl side),
there is absolutely no difference (just like specifying `Fn() + FnOnce()` has a redundant `FnOnce()` bound).

## Why do traits methods need to be marked as `(const)`

## `(const) Destruct` super trait

The `Destruct` marker trait is used to name the previously unnameable drop glue that every type has.
It has no methods, as drop glue is handled entirely by the compiler,

> but in theory drop glue could become something one can explicitly call without having to resort to extracting the drop glue function pointer from a `dyn Trait`.

Reviewer 9: It's already something you can call, isn't it? It's called `std::ptr::drop_in_place`.

Reviewer 3: Maybe `Destruct` should have a method after all.

const fn add<T: (const) Add>(
    a: NewType<T>,
    b: NewType<T>,
) -> Result<NewType<T::Output>, Error> {
    a + b
}
```

which now need a `T: (const) Destruct` bound, too.
In practice we have noticed that a large portion of APIs will have a `(const) Destruct` bound.
This bound has little value as an explicit bound that appears almost everywhere.
Especially since it is a fairly straight forward assumption that a type that has trait impls with `const` methods will also have a `Drop::drop` method that is `const` or only contain `const Destruct` types.

In the future we will also want to support `dyn (const) Trait` bounds, which invariably will require the type to implement `(const) Destruct` in order to fill in the function pointer for the `drop` slot in the vtable.
While that can in generic contexts always be handled by adding more `(const) Destruct` bounds, it would be more similar to how normal `dyn` safety
works if there were implicit `(const) Destruct` bounds for (most?) `(const) Trait` bounds.

Thus we require that all `trait`s with `(const)` methods also have a `(const) Destruct` super trait bound to ensure users don't need to add `(const) Destruct` bounds everywhere.

> We may relax this requirement in the future or make it implied.

Reviewer 9: Beautiful solution :)

Reviewer 2: If the standard library adopts these bounds for its traits , it won’t be able to relax them in the future. Which likely means that most of the ecosystem won’t either.

Reviewer 3: > Thus we require that all `trait`s with `(const)` methods also have a `(const) Destruct` super trait bound to ensure users don't need to add `(const) Destruct` bounds everywhere.

I know this is something I had proposed, but where @nikomatsakis and I ended up landing was pushing these bounds to the use-site, which would imply not requiring this bound.  This doesn't save space for making it implicit then, of course, but we could always still do that over an edition.

Our usual `Drop` rules enforce that an impl must have the same bounds as the type.
`(const)` modifiers are special here, because they are only needed in const contexts.
While they cause exactly the divergence that we want to prevent with the `Drop` impl rules:
a type can be declared, but not dropped, because bounds are unfulfilled, this is:

* Already the case in const contexts, just for all types that aren't trivially free of `Drop` types.
* Exactly the behaviour we want.

Extraneous `(const) Trait` bounds where `Trait` isn't a bound on the type at all are still rejected:

```rust
impl<T: (const) Bar + (const) Baz> Drop for Foo<T> {
    const fn drop(&mut self) {
        self.0.thing();
    }
}
```

errors with

```
error[E0367]: `Drop` impl requires `T: Baz` but the struct it is implemented for does not
  --> src/lib.rs:13:22
   |
13 | impl<T: (const) Bar + (const) Baz> Drop for Foo<T> {
   |                      ^^^^^^^^^^
   |
note: the implementor must specify the same requirement
  --> src/lib.rs:8:1
   |
8  | struct Foo<T: Bar>(T);
   | ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

## Adding any feature at all around constness

> I think we've reached the point where all critics have agreed that this one kind of effect system is unavoidable since we want to be able to write maintainable code for compile time evaluation.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
I think we've reached the point where all critics have agreed that this one kind of effect system is unavoidable since we want to be able to write maintainable generic code for compile time evaluation.
```

    if a == b {}
}
```

Things like `Option::map` or `PartialEq` for arrays/tuples could not be made const without const trait bounds,
as they need to actually call the generic `FnOnce` argument or nested `PartialEq` impls.

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

## Migrate to `(const) fn`

`const fn` and `const` items have slightly different meanings for `const`:

`const fn` can also be called at runtime just fine, while the others are always const
contexts and need to be evaluated by the const evaluator.

Additionally `const Trait` bounds have a third meaning (the same as `const Trait` in `impl const Trait for Type`):

They can be invoked at compile time, but also in `const fn`.

While all these meanings are subtly different, making their differences more obvious will not make them easier to understand.
All that changing to `(const) fn` would achieve is that folk will add the sigil when told by the compiler, and complain about
having to type a sigil, when there is no meaning for `const fn` without a sigil.

While I see the allure from a language nerd perspective to give every meaning its own syntax, I believe it is much more practical to

> just call all of these `const` and only separate the `(const) Trait` bounds from `const Trait` bounds.

Reviewer 9: If it'd just be bounds, that'd be nice... but it's also `(const) fn` in traits. The argument that "we only use `(const)` when it has a different meaning than `const`" still applies, but I expect that by a wide margin, the common case will be `(const) fn` in traits and `const fn` outside traits, and that will look oddly inconsistent.

Reviewer 2: The common case will be `(const) fn` in trait *declarations*, but the *impls* will use `const fn`.

Reviewer 3: > The common case will be `(const) fn` in trait _declarations_, but the _impls_ will use `const fn`.

No, not necessarily.  The model @nikomatsakis and I landed on is that the parens in `(const) fn` represent what is being tied to that associated effect, both in the trait def and in the impl.  In our discussion and in his [write-up](https://nikomatsakis.github.io/constantly-effective/quadrant-paren-const.html), Niko had a good example of why this matters.  It looks like this:

```rust
trait Tr {
    (const) fn f();
    const fn g();
    fn h();
}

struct W<T>(T);
impl<T: (const) Default> Tr for W<T> {
    const fn f() {
        T::default(); //~ ERROR?
    }
    const fn g() {}
    const fn h() {}
}
```

Note that `f` uses a generic from the impl header.

In the model, `const fn` is supposed to mean that the item is "always-maybe-const".  That is, that its constness is dependent only on its own generics and is independent of the implicit associated effect on the trait.  That's not true for `f` here (as the effect on the input generic is tied to the associated effect in the desugaring), and to see that the `T::default()` call is actually OK, we end up needing to consult the trait definition.  So it's more clear to write this as:

```rust
struct W<T>(T);
impl<T: (const) Default> Tr for W<T> {
    (const) fn f() {
        T::default(); //~ OK
    }
    const fn g() {}
    const fn h() {}
}
```

Conceptually, as well, if we're not making that `T::default()` call, it should be possible to indicate that we're "refining" the trait (i.e. "offering more than the trait requires") by implementing this item as "always-maybe-const" (when only "maybe-maybe-const" was required).  But if we use `const fn f` here and consequently have to look at the trait def, then it's not possible to indicate that.  Maybe this doesn't matter in practice in this case, but there is a conceptual distinction.

Another angle is that, during the RPITIT discussions, one of our design axioms was trying to preserve as best as possible the ability to copy signatures from the trait def to the trait impl.  In that spirit, the ability to write `(const) fn` in the trait impl is important.

We did debate this one both ways, but Niko and I landed, for the moment, on the norm being `(const) fn` in the trait impls for `(const) fn` items.

Of course, writing `const fn` should also work, most of the time (except in cases like the above), due to this refinement perspective.

Reviewer 2: Oooh, that is a great point. And also, a demonstration of why this RFC *really* needs to add some examples with default bounds.

However, I think *both* models you present are critically flawed. The `impl` block in your examples should instead be written like so:

```rust
struct W<T>(T);
impl<T: Default> Tr for W<T> {
    const fn f()
    where
        T: (const) Default,
    {
        T::default(); //~ OK
    }
    const fn g() {}
    const fn h() {}
}
```

Basically, any `(const)` in the `where` clauses of the impl apply as if they had been written on each of the individual methods. But you can use explicit `where` clauses on said methods if you need different behavior for different ones.

This design preserves an essential property of `impl` blocks: you don't need to look at the trait definition to understand the signature of the items they define (other than default items not overridden).

- Another way of expressing this is that if you delete the `Trait for` part of a trait impl, you are left with a perfectly valid inherent impl (disregarding coherence and default items not overridden).
- This means that implementers can immediately start refining impls with `const fn` without waiting on the trait definer to adopt this feature. When said definer eventually does so, the updated impl is immediately `const Trait` compatible.

Reviewer 9: > We did debate this one both ways, but Niko and I landed, for the moment, on (const) fn being required in the trait impls in these cases for (const) fn items, and allowed in others.

That is not reflected in the RFC, or did I misunderstand?
To make sure I understand correctly, this means the following is allowed? Or does "allowed in others" just refer to traits?
```rust
(const) fn default<T: (const) Default>() -> T {
    T::default()
}
```

Reviewer 9: > However, there is an alternative. The impl block in your examples could instead be written like so:

That would only work if the trait already has this `where` clause, right? An impl otherwise cannot just add more `where` clauses.

Reviewer 2: > An impl otherwise cannot just add more `where` clauses.

If you look carefully, the clause in question only restricts when the method can be `const`, so it doesn’t break the impl. If the clause was instead e.g. `where T: Send`, obviously that would not be permissible.

Reviewer 2: > the ability to copy signatures from the trait def to the trait impl.

This is another tiny win for `~const` over `(const)`: when selecting code to copy, you can place your cursor after the `~` to copy only the `const fn ...` part.

Reviewer 9: > If you look carefully, the clause in question only restricts when the method, which is maybe-const in the trait definition, is const in the impl.

I still wouldn't expect that to be permitted.

Reviewer 2: This works today (without even a warning):

```rust
trait Tr {
    fn f();
    fn g();
    fn h();
}

struct W<T>(T);
impl<T: Default> Tr for W<T> {
    fn f()
    where
        T: Default,
    {
        T::default();
    }
    fn g() {}
    fn h() {}
}
```

I don’t see how my example is any more dubious than this?

And in fact, this sort of thing is necessary if we want fully general refinement. For example, you can’t express this with bounds on the `impl` block alone:

```rust
trait Tr {
    (const) fn d() -> Self;
    (const) fn n(self) -> Self;
}

struct W<T>(T);
impl<T: Default + Not<Output = Self>> Tr for W<T> {
    const fn f() -> Self
    where
        T: (const) Default,
    {
        T::default()
    }
    const fn n(self) -> Self
    where
        T: (const) Not<Output = Self>,
    {
        !self
    }
}
```

Reviewer 9: > This works today (without even a warning):

Interesting, I was not aware we are already doing that kind of reasoning.

Reviewer 3: > > We did debate this one both ways, but Niko and I landed, for the moment, on (const) fn being required in the trait impls in these cases for (const) fn items, and allowed in others.
> 
> That is not reflected in the RFC, or did I misunderstand? To make sure I understand correctly, this means the following is allowed? Or does "allowed in others" just refer to trait impls?

It just refers to trait impls.  I.e., "...being required in the trait impls in these cases for `(const) fn` items, and allowed in [the other cases in trait impls]".

Reviewer 2: OK, looking into it further, AIUI the current model does *not* satisfy the following property (from https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1990439966) after all:

> This design preserves an essential property of `impl` blocks: you don't need to look at the trait definition to understand the signature of the items they define (other than default items not overridden).
> 
> Another way of expressing this is that if you delete the `Trait for` part of a trait impl, you are left with a perfectly valid inherent impl (disregarding coherence and default items not overridden).

Do I understand that correctly?

If so, I think that is a serious problem. I see several solutions. One is the design I proposed in that comment. Another is to say that the `(const)` portion of a `(const) Trait` bound on an `impl` block (inherent or trait) is relevant only to functions inside that block marked `(const) fn`, and that any function can be so marked (as long as the trait’s requirements are upheld in the end, if there is a trait). IIUC, this latter option is strictly more permissive than the current design.

Reviewer 3: Go on, what property exactly are you saying is violated, why do you think it's violated, and why do you think that property is important?

Reviewer 3: > Interesting, I was not aware we are already doing that kind of reasoning.

As I recall, we take the trait method bounds and the impl header bounds together and see if from those we can prove the impl method bounds.

Reviewer 3: > And in fact, this sort of thing is necessary if we want fully general refinement. For example, you can’t express the `impl` below with bounds on the `impl` block alone:
> 
> ```rust
> trait Tr {
>     (const) fn d() -> Self;
> }
> 
> struct W<T>(T);
> impl<T: Default> Tr for W<T> {
>     const fn d() -> Self
>     where
>         T: (const) Default,
>     {
>         T::default()
>     }
> }
> ```

(Trimmed the example.)

What's your argument that this should be accepted?  As mentioned, we prove that the impl method "provides more and requires less" by seeing if we can prove its predicates from the trait method bounds and the impl header bounds.

Here, the trait method has no bounds, and the impl header has a `T: Default` bound.  There's no way we can prove the `T: (const) Default` predicate in the impl item from that.

Reviewer 2: > Go on, what property exactly are you saying is violated, why do you think it's violated, and why do you think that property is important?

It’s right there in my comment? (Ctrl-F “An essential property of `impl` blocks”)

> What's your argument that this should be accepted? As mentioned, we prove that the impl method "requires no more" than the trait by seeing if we can prove its predicates from the trait method bounds and the impl header bounds.

In the non-`const` case, we don’t require `const` anything, so the `impl` provides a perfectly valid implementation of non-`const` `Tr` for any `W<T: Default + Not<Output = Self>>`. When `T: const Default + const Not<Output = Self>` is satisfied, then we additionally provide all that is required for a `const Tr` impl. When `T` meets only one of the two `const` trait bounds, we get an impl of non-`const` `Tr` + some refinement extras.

Reviewer 2: > I see several solutions:

See https://hackmd.io/@Jules-Bertholet/BkEksib2ye#const-bounds-on-impls for a longer explanation

Reviewer 3: > > Go on, what property exactly are you saying is violated, why do you think it's violated, and why do you think that property is important?
> 
> It’s right there in my comment? (Ctrl-F “An essential property of `impl` blocks”)

...why do you think it's violated, and why do you think that property is important?

Also, your claim isn't true of Rust today, so however desirable it might be, I'd question how essential it is.  See:

[Playground link](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2024&code=%2F%2F+This+demonstrates+that%2C+in+Rust%2C+it%27s+not+possible+to+just+look+at%0A%2F%2F+the+signatures+in+the+impl+block+to+understand+the+effective%0A%2F%2F+signatures+of+the+items.++We+have+to+look+at+the+trait+definition.%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+Yes%2C+the+refinement+RFC+proposed+to+affect+this%2C+but+there+are%0A%2F%2F+serious+concerns+about+the+feasibility+of+implementing+that+RFC%0A%2F%2F+soundly+within+the+type+system.%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+See%3A%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+-+https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Frust-lang%2Frfcs%2Fpull%2F3762%23discussion_r1995487621%0A%2F%2F%0A%2F%2F+Author%3A+TC%0A%2F%2F+Date%3A+2025-03-15%0A%0Atrait+Super+%7B%7D%0Atrait+Sub%3A+Super+%7B%7D%0A%0Atrait+Tr+%7B%0A++++fn+f%3CT%3A+Sub%3E%28%29%3B%0A%7D%0A%0Astruct+W%3CT%3E%28T%29%3B%0A%0A%2F%2F+If+this+were+an+inherent+impl%2C+the+bound+below+would+mean+exactly%0A%2F%2F+what+it+is+says%2C+but+since+it%27s+not%2C+we+have+to+look+at+the+trait%0A%2F%2F+definition.%0Aimpl+Tr+for+W%3C%28%29%3E+%7B%0A++++fn+f%3CT%3A+Super%3E%28%29+%7B%7D%0A%7D%0A%0Aimpl+Super+for+%28%29+%7B%7D%0A%0Afn+main%28%29+%7B%0A++++%3CW%3C%28%29%3E+as+Tr%3E%3A%3Af%3A%3A%3C%28%29%3E%28%29%3B+%2F%2F~+ERROR%0A%7D%0A)

## `const fn()` pointers

Just like `const fn foo(x: impl (const) Trait) { x.method() }` and `const fn foo(x: &dyn (const) Trait) { x.method() }` we want to allow
`const fn foo(f: (const) fn()) { f() }`.

These require changing the type system, making the constness of a function pointer part of the type.
This in turn implies that a `const fn()` function pointer, a `(const) fn()` function pointer and a `fn()` function pointer could have
different `TypeId`s, which is something that requires more design and consideration to clarify whether supporting downcasting with `Any`

> or just supporting `TypeId` equality checks detecting constness is desirable.

Reviewer 9: It gets a lot more complicated than that: surely we also want people to be able to newtype such a function pointer type, so all of these are now a thing:
```rust
struct S1(fn());
struct S2(const fn());
struct S3((const) fn());
```
From here it is actually not far to `(const) Trait` bounds on types (which the RFC still claims make no sense, which is IMO an incorrect claim).

Reviewer 9: With types like `struct S3((const) fn());`, clearly what we call a "type" is now more like a "function from constness to types". And thus the `where` clauses in a type can refer to this ambient constness via `(const) Trait`, similar to `where` clauses in a `const fn`.

Reviewer 2: Note that just because there is motivation for `const`-parameterized user defined types, that does not necessarily imply that we should also allow `(const) Trait` bounds on said types.

Reviewer 2: Note that just because there is motivation for `const`-parameterized user-defined types, that does not necessarily imply that we should also allow `(const) Trait` bounds on said types.

Reviewer 9: Correct, and I did not say that it would imply as much. But "such bounds make conceptually no sense" is factually incorrect. If we dismiss such bounds we should do it properly. The complexity of "a type's meaning depends on the surrounding context" will inevitably become part of the language once we have `(const) fn` types or `dyn (const) Trait` types, so at that point I don't see a good reason to prevent the user from also using this in where clauses.

We could allow writing `const fn` in impls without the trait opting into it.
This would not affect `T: Trait` bounds, but still allow non-generic calls.

This is similar to other refinings in impls, as the function still satisfies everything from the trait.

Example: without adjusting `rand` for const trait support at all, users could write

```rust
struct CountingRng(u64);

impl RngCore for CountingRng {
    const fn next_u32(&mut self) -> u32 {
        self.next_u64() as u32
    }

    const fn next_u64(&mut self) -> u64 {
        self.0 += 1;
        self.0
    }

    const fn fill_bytes(&mut self, dest: &mut [u8]) {
        let mut left = dest;
        while left.len() >= 8 {
            let (l, r) = { left }.split_at_mut(8);
            left = r;
            let chunk: [u8; 8] = rng.next_u64().to_le_bytes();
            l.copy_from_slice(&chunk);
        }
        let n = left.len();
        let chunk: [u8; 8] = rng.next_u64().to_le_bytes();
        left.copy_from_slice(&chunk[..n]);
    }

    const fn try_fill_bytes(&mut self, dest: &mut [u8]) -> Result<(), Error> {
        Ok(self.fill_bytes(dest))
    }
}
```

and use it in non-generic code.

> It is not clear this is doable soundly for generic methods.

Reviewer 24: ```suggestion
It is not clear this is doable soundly for generic methods.

## Macro matcher

In the future, we may want to provide a macro matcher for this optional component of a function declaration or trait declaration, similar to `:vis` for an optional visibility. This would allow macros to match it conveniently, and may encourage forwards compatibility with future things in the same category. However, we should not add such a matcher right away, until we have a clearer picture of what else we may add to the same category.
```

- Feature Name: `const_trait_methods`
- Start Date: 2024-12-13
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#67792](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/67792)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Make trait methods callable in const contexts. This includes the following parts:

* Allow marking `trait` declarations as const implementable.
* Allow marking `trait` impls as `const`.
* Allow marking trait bounds as `const` to make methods of them callable in const contexts.

Fully contained example ([Playground of currently working example](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=2ab8d572c63bcf116b93c632705ddc1b)):

```rust
const trait Default {
    (const) fn default() -> Self;

> }

Reviewer 3: Oli [said](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r2021236481):

> The RFC requires `const trait Trait` and `impl const Trait` again after discussing it with niko.
> 
> Rationale is
> 
> * Pro: When you change this, you have a "one shot" chance to adjust the effects of methods in the trait.
> * Pro: More clear what your intent is, allows for better diagnostics; if you add a `(const)` to a method without modifying the trait, we error and have a chance to explain what's happening a bit, because that may indicate you have a confused mental model.
> * Pro: Syntax mirrors usage in other places:
>   
>   * `T: const Trait`
>   * `const fn foo<T: (const) Default>` and `const trait Default`
> * Con: Redundant. (But we could always not require it.)

Regarding marking of the trait, I'm OK with explicit syntactic indication in the current edition.  In fact, I somewhat prefer it for the reasons you mention.  But I see those reasons (and in particular the number 1 and 2 "pros" that you mention) as transitional, and over time, using editions, I'd like to wash out this distinction, and that leads me to prefer using an attribute for this.

If we mark the impls with `const Trait`, that makes a certain sense, as it does match the bound syntax, and the `const` in that position means something analogous.  In one place, it's setting (or asserting) the value of the associated effect, and in the other, it's bounding it.  That makes sense.

On the trait, though, we'd be overloading `const` to mean something rather different.  Probably I'd frame what it's doing as "allowing `const` / `(const)` bounds on the trait and allowing the setting or asserting of the associated effect on impls of the trait."  For that one, I'd rather just have an attribute to this effect and later have an attribute that "disallows (those things)" that we'd employ when flipping the default over an edition.

Author: I'll add it to future possibilities that we can remove the `const` from the trait decl and turn it into a lint or sth if you didn't add any const methods

Reviewer 9: I think there's a good semantic reason to mark the trait: it indicates the presence of an associated effect variable in the trait. non-const traits do not need an associated effect variable and thus ideally shouldn't have one to avoid mysterious issues due to a hidden degree of freedom.

Reviewer 3: ```rust
trait Tr {
    fn f();
}

impl Tr for () {
    const fn f();
}

fn test1<T: Tr>() {
    // `f` can't be used as `const` in a generic context.
    const { <T as Tr>::f() }; //~ ERROR
}

fn test2() {
    // Since `f` is refined as `const` for `()`, though, we can use it
    // as `const` when we know the concrete type.
    const { <() as Tr>::f() }; //~ OK
}
```

If we ever accept this, which I think we should, then the most sensible way to explain that, I'd suggest, is still with associated effects and the "impls of associated types/effects are always refining" rule.

That's among the set of reasons why I don't think it's prudent for us to bifurcate the space of traits long-term.

Reviewer 3: Here's the parallel, by the way, that I draw for why that should work:

```rust
trait Tr {
    async fn f();
}

impl Tr for () {
    fn f() -> impl Future<Output = ()> + Send {
        core::future::ready(())
    }
}

fn spawn<T: Send>(_: T) {}

fn test1<T: Tr>() {
    // `f(..)` can't be used as `Send` in a generic context.
    spawn(<T as Tr>::f()); //~ ERROR
}

fn test2() {
    // Since `f(..)` is refined as `Send` for `()`, though, we can use
    // it as `Send` when we know the concrete type.
    spawn(<() as Tr>::f()); //~ OK
}
```

Author: If a crate has

```rust
trait Foo { fn foo<T: Bar>(); }
```

And a dependent crate writes

```rust
impl Foo for () {
    const fn foo<T: ~const Bar>() {
        T::bar() 
    }
}
```

And then the trait author then makes the semver compatible change of

```rust
trait Foo { (const) fn foo<T: Bar>(); } 
```

(With or without a marker on trait, the change would be legal once) 

Then the dependent crate must now report an error because its impl is not valid anymore and we could call foo with a type that doesn't have a const Bar impl

Since this future you want is not possible, I don't think we should prepare for it in the design of this feature

Reviewer 3: Yes, we cannot allow the `(const)` bound there as part of the refinement.

```rust
impl Foo for () {
    const fn foo<T: (const) Bar>() {
        //          ~~~~~~~
        //      Cannot allow this.
        T::bar()
    }
}
```

I've said that elsewhere.  That's annoying, but it is what it is.  It's what we'd expect from our model.  There's no way to prove that `T: (const) Bar` bound from the predicates in the impl header combined with those of the method in the trait definition.

As best I can tell, this annoying truth does not preclude what I describe as desirable.

Reviewer 3: Secondly, and more importantly, recall that I don't want there to be this bifurcation long-term.  Probably, relatively speaking, I don't actually care that much about whether people can ever refine traits that haven't opted-in.  But I want to opt-in traits by default in the next edition.  So when I say that I want this to work:

```rust
trait Tr {
    fn f();
}

impl Tr for () {
    const fn f() {}
}
```

What I mean most of all is that I don't want to have to explain to a trait author why the person should really always write (in the next edition),

```rust
const trait Tr {
    fn f();
}
```

even though there are no const methods in the trait, since it's pointless to disallow your implementors from refining your trait, but under the model where "there's no associated effect unless you write `const trait`", that's what would be implied.

And if we might go that route, over an edition, then I don't think it's worthwhile to additionally overload `const` in this way in this position.

Reviewer 3: Put simply, once we stabilize this, I'm planning to opt-in all of my traits and to require that in my projects for new ones.  I'm planning to tell my friends to always opt-in all traits.  It feels very much to me that in adopting this general design (even without refinement) that we're making `const trait Tr` the new `trait Tr`, so I want to lean into that, over an edition, and go back to just writing `trait Tr` rather than having `const trait Tr` everywhere.

So, given that, I'll willing to spell `const trait Tr` somewhat more noisily, with an attribute, in the current edition, as that feels better for something that should be temporary.

Author: > Yes, we cannot allow the `(const)` bound there as part of the refinement.

That makes this refinement feature very limited as you couldn't write an impl for a generic wrapper type

```rust
impl<T: (const) Tr> Tr for MyBox<T> {
    fn m(&self) {
        (**self).m() 
    } 
} 
```

And yes, I know you want rtn for methods constness. But it seems easier to just not allow refinement and avoid all this complexity.

Also if you want to flip the default we should also default the methods to being `(const)` to avoid all those issues. But then we're back at the original proposal that didn't even need to mark methods

Author: Also wrt the default being const. The same could be said for const fn in general. So maybe these should be considered together. I think all this is out of scope of this RFC though

Reviewer 2: > I've said that elsewhere. That's annoying, but it is what it is. It's what we'd expect from our model. There's no way to prove that T: (const) Bar bound from the predicates in the impl header combined with those of the method in the trait definition.

***Yes, there is***. ***You can prove it***, with [a model that is smart enough](https://hackmd.io/45KvFLBbS_utAtO4vPVBYA?view#Asserting-constness-of-an-impl). If the current model isn’t smart enough, we can add “make model smarter” as a future possibility.

To elaborate: it all works out if you imagine that every `fn` has *two* sets of bounds. There is the non-`const` set of bounds, required to call it in a non-`const` context. And a stronger set of bounds, required in a `const` context. (Set 2 always implies set 1.)

In a non-`const` `fn|, the second set is always trivially false; in today’s `const fn`, it always equals the first set. This RFC introduces functions where the second set is strictly stronger than the first set, but also not trivially false.

Under this framework, the `T: (const) Bar` bound is actually two bounds in one: `T: Bar` for the non-`const` bound set, and `T: const Bar` for the `const` bound set. The `T: Bar` part of that follows trivially from the non-`const` set of bounds on the method in all versions of `trait Foo`’s definition. The `T: const Bar` part follows from the `const` set of bounds on the method in all versions of non-`const` `trait Foo`’s definition (as a trivially false bound implies anything). Therefore, we have a valid impl of `Foo`. We do *not* have a valid impl of `const Foo`, because `T: const Bar` is not provable from `T: Bar`. But that is not a issue. `(): const Foo` simply won’t hold, and that is all.

Reviewer 2: > Put simply, once we stabilize this, I'm planning to opt-in all of my traits and to require that in my projects for new ones.

What about traits for doing heap allocations, or I/O? For some traits, it doesn’t make sense to make them `const`.

Reviewer 25: > What about traits for doing heap allocations, or I/O? For some traits, it doesn’t make sense to make them `const`.

How do you know that the implementation is performing a system call?

For example, have a look at the Store API (https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3446) which would aim at replacing the Allocator API. It was specifically designed to allow "in-line" memory, ie for `[T; N]` to be used as the Store type and raw memory arena both, in which case even though it's an "allocation" API, no system call is required and it should be perfectly possible to call _and return from_ a const context.

Similarly, even if the trait is FileSystem, there's no reason that a fake/mock implementation cannot be supplied in a const context.

As such, as long as a trait can be used in a const context even if some methods cannot -- for example because they return a raw file descriptor -- there's no reason not to allow a user to provide a const implementation, and allow them to use this const implementation in a const context.

Reviewer 2: Yes, there are cases where, with extra thought and design, you might be able to design a sensible `const` version of the trait even in such domains. But there are also cases where you can’t (like your example of raw file descriptors, but also something as simple as “this returns a `Vec`”). And even where it’s possible, the trait author might choose not to do so yet, as they may not be certain of the right API, or they may want to wait for upcoming `const` features in the language or in their library dependencies.

Reviewer 3: > But it seems easier to just not allow refinement and avoid all this complexity.

People made this argument about refinement with RPITIT as well.  We defended it on the basis that "RPITIT is just hidden associated types, and associated types are always refining."  I don't believe that RPITIT would have been better without this kind of refinement.  And having defended it with RPITIT, I'm probably especially skeptical that we should foreclose or plan to foreclose doing the same thing with hidden associated effects when there's a clear parallel.

Yes, until and unless we have more features there will be some limitations.  We often choose to live with those for awhile while keeping doors open.

To the point of your example about blanket impls over wrapper types, there's no current way to express this either, even after we ship RTN:

```rust
trait Tr {
    async fn f(&self) {}
}

impl<T: Tr<f(..): (Copy)>> Tr for MyBox<T> {
    fn f(&self) -> impl Future<Output = ()> + (Copy) {
        (**self).f()
    }
}
```

And of course, until we ship RTN, even the version without conditional bounds isn't and hasn't been possible to express (without desugaring the trait away from AFIT/RPITIT, at which point you have to start writing manual `Future` impls to implement the trait since we haven't shipped ATPIT either).

> Also wrt the default being const. The same could be said for const fn in general. So maybe these should be considered together.

These are not comparable.  Flipping the default on `fn` means making all function bodies const contexts by default and then making `runtime` an explicit effect somehow.  Flipping the default on `trait` doesn't mean anything like that, especially now that we're marking all items.  It doesn't require us to invert an effect and all that entails.

One of my concerns about extending `const` to this position is that it overloads `const` in a different and unrelated way.  The fact that even we're tempted to equivocate between these very different semantics in our own discussions just because of the shared keyword does not lessen my concern about this.

> I think all this is out of scope of this RFC though

If we're going to require syntax to opt-in traits, we should settle that syntax in this RFC.

impl const Default for () {
    const fn default() {}

> }

Reviewer 3: Oli [said](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r2021236481):

> The RFC requires `const trait Trait` and `impl const Trait` again after discussing it with niko.
> 
> Rationale is
> 
> * Pro: When you change this, you have a "one shot" chance to adjust the effects of methods in the trait.
> * Pro: More clear what your intent is, allows for better diagnostics; if you add a `(const)` to a method without modifying the trait, we error and have a chance to explain what's happening a bit, because that may indicate you have a confused mental model.
> * Pro: Syntax mirrors usage in other places:
>   
>   * `T: const Trait`
>   * `const fn foo<T: (const) Default>` and `const trait Default`
> * Con: Redundant. (But we could always not require it.)

For the marking of the impl, I'm OK with `impl const Trait` (if we decide we want to mark impls), as it matches the bound syntax and means an analogous thing.  In one place, it's setting (or asserting) the value of the associated effect, and in the other, it's bounding it.  That makes sense.

Unlike with [marking the trait](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762/files#r2022307712), I don't see this one as transitional.

On the question of whether we want to mark the impls, I'll say that not doing so feels approximately equivalent to me to how one has to consider all of the fields of a type to know what auto traits that type implements, and marking it feels similar to `#[derive(Copy)]`, for all of the good and bad that each of those entail.

Another element to consider is that if we don't mark the impl, then conceivably we could allow people to constify their impls ahead of the trait being updated.  Then, those impls would automatically qualify for the bound when the trait was marked for that.  I don't know how important that is.  I could imagine maybe people caring who want their thing to work with both newer and older versions of some upstream trait and want their own downstreams to be able to take advantage of the `const` bound when using the new trait version.  Marking the impl means this ecosystem transition has to be serialized.  Maybe or maybe not that matters, but it's something to think about.

Reviewer 2: > Another element to consider is that if we don't mark the impl, then conceivably we could allow people to constify their impls ahead of the trait being updated. Then, those impls would automatically qualify for the bound when the trait was marked for that.

As I’ve argued before, I think this would be nice to have, but it doesn’t need to be in the MVP, and it’s compatible with allowing `impl const Trait` as an optional explicit assertion. *However*, if we want to be forward-compatible with this, we need a special case now for `const Trait`s with no non-defaulted `(const) fn`s—they should probably be forbidden for now.

Reviewer 2: > Another element to consider is that if we don't mark the impl, then conceivably we could allow people to constify their impls ahead of the trait being updated. Then, those impls would automatically qualify for the bound when the trait was marked for that.

As I’ve argued before, I think this would be nice to have, but it doesn’t need to be in the MVP, and it’s compatible with allowing `impl const Trait` as an optional explicit assertion. *However*, if we want to be forward-compatible with this, we need a special case now for `const Trait`s with no non-defaulted `(const) fn`s—they should probably be forbidden for now.

struct Thing<T>(T);

impl<T: (const) Default> const Default for Thing<T> {
    (const) fn default() -> Self { Self(T::default()) }

> }

Reviewer 3: Over in https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/139858#discussion_r2046182970, there was an ask to start a thread here about this `(const) fn` syntax on methods in the impl.

Requiring this `(const) fn` syntax in cases like the one above, where the method's constness as implemented necessarily depends on the constness of a generic from the impl header -- and consequently on the associated effect in the desugaring -- is where @nikomatsakis and I had landed back at the start of March.  We had discussed it both ways, but we liked this one better in our our discussion.  Among other things, we liked how this emphasizes the connection to the associated effect, and this syntax allows for copying signatures from the trait def to the impl.

Niko mentioned this in his write-up [here](https://nikomatsakis.github.io/constantly-effective/quadrant-paren-const.html#tldr), and I elaborated on this earlier in this thread in https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1990360320 and in https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1986065851.  Please see those comments, particularly the first, for more details.

Author: This I'd a copy paste error. I have never intentionally written this syntax

Author: This is just more syntax salt solely for the purpose of some language purity. There is no meaningful difference unless we stop marking impls which would be a mess

Reviewer 9: > This is just more syntax salt solely for the purpose of some language purity.

No, it is using syntax to convey a conceptual difference: is this function's constness tied to the constness of the trait (and therefore dependent on `(const)` bounds in the impl header) or not?

Author: sure, but is this difference actually useful? We need to check whether `const fn` refers to a `(const) fn` in the trait or a `const fn` in the trait anyway. This is just a random thing users will need to learn without actually caring. Only from a language purity this is nice, but practically this has neither an effect on the compiler (beyond being annoying to implement) nor on users' ability to understand the code

Reviewer 9: It seems quite relevant to me to understand which bounds I have in context. A `const fn` cannot use `(const) Trait` bounds of the impl block, right?

Author: if it was declared as `(const) fn ` in the trait it can afaict. Or I still don't understand the TC/niko model so maybe someone else should write this RFC because I'm lost honestly and it seems bad to have someone who dislikes a model (the one allowing `const`, `(const)` and normal fns in one trait) being the one to write the RFC just to walk into mines like these.

Reviewer 9: > the one allowing const, (const) and normal fns in one trait

Yeah fair, on that one I am with you, I don't think we need that for the MVP -- though we should keep it in mind as a future possibility.

Reviewer 2: > It seems quite relevant to me to understand which bounds I have in context. A `const fn` cannot use `(const) Trait` bounds of the impl block, right?

If there *are* no bounds on the `impl` block, then this is a distinction without a difference. IMO we should require `(const) fn` only when there actually are such bounds.

```rust
impl const Trait for Type {
    const fn thing() {}
}
```

### `const` methods and non-`const` methods on the same trait

If there is no `(const)` modifier on a method in a `const trait`, it is treated as any normal method is today.
So `impl const Trait` blocks cannot mark them as `const` either.

```rust
const trait Foo {
    (const) fn foo(&self);
    fn bar(&self);
}

impl const Foo for () {
    const fn foo(&self) {}
    fn bar(&self) {
        println!("writing to terminal is not possible in const eval");
    }
}
```

### Conditionally-const trait bounds

Many generic `const fn` and especially many `const trait`s do not actually require a const methods in the trait impl for their generic parameters.
As `const fn` can also be called at runtime, it would be too strict to require it to only be able to call things with const methods in the trait impls.
Picking up the example from [the beginning](#summary):

```rust
const trait Default {
    (const) fn default() -> Self;
}

impl const Default for () {
    const fn default() {}
}

impl<T: Default> const Default for Box<T> {
    fn default() -> Self { Box::new(T::default()) }

> }

Reviewer 2: This impl shouldn’t compile, right?

Any `impl const Trait for Type` is allowed to have `(const)` trait bounds:

```rust
struct MyStruct<T>(T);

impl<T: (const) Add<Output = T>> const Add for MyStruct<T> {
    type Output = MyStruct<T>;
    const fn add(self, other: MyStruct<T>) -> MyStruct<T> {
        MyStruct(self.0 + other.0)
    }
}

impl<T> const Add for &MyStruct<T>
where
    for<'a> &'a T: (const) Add<Output = T>,
{
    type Output = MyStruct<T>;
    const fn add(self, other: &MyStruct<T>) -> MyStruct<T> {
        MyStruct(&self.0 + &other.0)
    }
}
```

See [this playground](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=313a38ef5c36b2ddf489f74167c1ac8a) for an example that works on nightly today.

### Derives

Most of the time you don't want to write out your impls by hand, but instead derive them as the implementation is obvious from your data structure.

```rust
#[const_derive(PartialEq, Eq)]
struct MyStruct<T>(T);
```

generates

```rust
impl<T: (const) PartialEq> const PartialEq for MyStruct<T> {
    (const) fn eq(&self, other: &Rhs) -> bool {
        self.0 == other.0
    }
}

impl<T: (const) Eq> const Eq for MyStruct<T> {}
```

> For this RFC, we stick with `derive_const`, because it interacts with other ongoing bits of design work (e.g., RFC 3715)

Reviewer 2: `const_derive` or `derive_const`?

* Appears to permit more behaviours than are desirable (multiple such parameters, math on these parameters, ...), so they need to be prevented, adding more checks.
* Is not necessary unless we'd allow much more complex kinds of bounds. So it can be kept open as a future possibility, but for now there's no need.
* Does not quite work in Rust due to the constness then being early bound instead of late bound, cause all kinds of problems around closures and function calls.
* Technically cause two entirely separate MIR bodies to be generated, one for where the effect is on and one where it is off. On top of that it then theoretically allows you to call the const MIR body from non-const code.

Thus that approach was abandoned after proponents and opponents cooperated in trying to make the generic parameter approach work, resulting in all proponents becoming opponents, too.

### Sites where `const Trait` bounds can be used

Everywhere where non-const trait bounds can be written, but only for traits that have `(const)` methods.

### Sites where `(const) Trait` bounds can be used

* `const fn`
* `(const) fn`
* `impl const Trait` blocks

> * NOT in inherent impls, the individual `const fn` need to be annotated instead

Reviewer 2: (Restating a point I tried to communicate in the now-resolved https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1990439966 thread)

This breaks a property that currently holds in Rust:

> If you delete `Trait for` from a trait `impl`, you are left with a perfectly valid inherent impl (disregarding coherence and default items not overridden).

Of course, we could always fix this backward-compatibly later, but we might as well have it work properly now.

Author: Also modulo visibility

Reviewer 2: Without adding `pub` annotations, you would have an entirely private inherent impl, but that would still be completely valid.

Reviewer 3: Also, as mentioned in that thread, modulo that the meaning of bounds in the impl can change.

Reviewer 3: And also, directly to the point here, this doesn't work at all if you use associated types in the impl.

What we have here is something that maps to associated effects, so it's no surprise it's the same.  Sure, with associated types, you could manually normalize those out.  Here, we're not yet providing the desugaring syntax you'd need to do that.  But we later could, and then it would be no different in this respect.

Or, more speculatively, maybe we'd later allow `(const)` in inherent impls.  There, it'd map to an inherent associated effect (by analogy to inherent associated types).  There's not much point in that today, but maybe someday, with enough of the desugaring stabilized, there could be some use in this.

* `const trait` declarations
    * super trait bounds
    * where bounds
    * associated type bounds

> * return position impl trait

Reviewer 2: Can you give an example of this?

### `const` desugaring

In a-mir-formality

```rust
fn compile_time_default<T: const Default>() -> T {
    const { T::default() }
}
```

desugars to

```rust
fn compile_time_default<T>() -> T
where
    T: Default<do: const>,
{
    const { T::default() }
}
```

### `(const)` desugaring

In a-mir-formality

```rust
const fn default<T: (const) Default>() -> T {
    T::default()
}
```

desugars to

```rust
const fn default<T>() -> T
where
    T: Default,
    do: <T as Default>,
{
    T::default()
}
```

### Why not both?

```rust
const fn checked_default<T>() -> T
where
    T: const Default,
    T: (const) Default,
    T: (const) PartialEq,
{
    let a = const { T::default() };
    let b = T::default();
    if a == b {
        a
    } else {
        panic!()
    }
}
```

Has a redundant bound. `T: const Default` implies `T: (const) Default`, so while the desugaring will include both (but may filter them out if we deem it useful on the impl side),
there is absolutely no difference (just like specifying `Fn() + FnOnce()` has a redundant `FnOnce()` bound).

## Why do traits methods need to be marked as `(const)`

> 

Reviewer 2: Missing body

* both.

So while it is entirely possible that rejecting this RFC and deciding not to go down this route
will lead to an ecosystem for const operations to be created, it would result in duplication and
inconsistencies that we'd rather like to avoid.

Such an ecosystem would also make `const fn` obsolete, as every `const fn` can in theory be represented
as a trait, it would just be very different to use from normal rust code and not really allow nice abstractions to be built.

```rust
const fn add(a: u32, b: u32) -> u32 { a + b }

struct Add<const A: u32, const B: u32>;

impl<const A: u32, const B:u32> Add<A, B> {
    const RESULT: u32 = A + B;
}

const FOO: u32 = add(5, 6);
const BAR: u32 = Add<5, 6>::RESULT;
```

## use `const Trait` bounds for conditionally-const, invent new syntax for always-const

It may seem tempting to use `const fn foo<T: const Trait>` to mean what in this RFC is `(const) Trait`, and then add new syntax for bounds that allow using trait methods in const blocks.

Examples of possible always const syntax:

* `=const Trait`
* `const const Trait` (lol)
* `const(always) Trait` (`pub` like)
* `const<true> Trait` (effect generic like)

> * `const! Trait`

Reviewer 26: Is there a strong reason not to do that? Because an always-const syntax seems more than tempting to me, it seems like the objectively correction solution.

`const(always)` in particular seems very expressive to me.

Reviewer 26: The reason I ask is actually that I found this section while writing my own version of this RFC, which goes all-in on `const Trait` as the default bound, and `const(always) Trait` as the stronger version.

[Rendered.](https://github.com/PoignardAzur/rust-rfcs/blob/2310414784eb7c2398d81f071cb40bc575942b90/text/0000-const-trait-impls.md)

    <T as Bar>::bar()
}

const _: () = foo();
```

This can be achieved across an edition by having some intermediate syntax like prepending `#[next_const]` attributes to all const fn that are using the new syntax, and having a migration lint that suggests adding it to every `const fn` that has trait bounds.

Then in the following edition, we can forbid the `#[next_const]` attribute and just make it the default.

The disadvantage of this is that sometimes, it creates stricter bounds than desired.

```rust
const fn foo<T: Foo>() {
    T::ASSOC_CONST
}
```

compiles today, and allows all types that implement `Foo`, irrespective of the constness of the impl.
With the opt-out scheme that would still compile, but suddenly require callers to provide a const impl.

The alternative proposed above (and the one folks are used to for a few years now on stable), is that trait bounds mean the same on all functions, you just can't call methods on them in `const fn`.

* nudging function authors to using the minimal necessary bounds to get their function
body to compile and thus requiring as little as possible from their callers,
* ensuring our implementation is correct by default.

> The implementation correctness argument is partially due to our history with `cosnt fn` trait bounds (see https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/83452 for where we got "reject all trait bounds" wrong and thus decided to stop using opt-out), and partially with our history with `?` bounds not being great either (https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/135229, https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/132209). An opt-in is much easier to make sound and keep sound.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The implementation correctness argument is partially due to our history with `const fn` trait bounds (see https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/83452 for where we got "reject all trait bounds" wrong and thus decided to stop using opt-out), and partially with our history with `?` bounds not being great either (https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/135229, https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/132209). An opt-in is much easier to make sound and keep sound.
```

We could allow writing `const fn` in impls without the trait opting into it.
This would not affect `T: Trait` bounds, but still allow non-generic calls.

This is similar to other refinings in impls, as the function still satisfies everything from the trait.

Example: without adjusting `rand` for const trait support at all, users could write

```rust
struct CountingRng(u64);

impl RngCore for CountingRng {
    const fn next_u32(&mut self) -> u32 {
        self.next_u64() as u32
    }

    const fn next_u64(&mut self) -> u64 {
        self.0 += 1;
        self.0
    }

    const fn fill_bytes(&mut self, dest: &mut [u8]) {
        let mut left = dest;
        while left.len() >= 8 {
            let (l, r) = { left }.split_at_mut(8);
            left = r;
            let chunk: [u8; 8] = rng.next_u64().to_le_bytes();
            l.copy_from_slice(&chunk);
        }
        let n = left.len();
        let chunk: [u8; 8] = rng.next_u64().to_le_bytes();
        left.copy_from_slice(&chunk[..n]);
    }

    const fn try_fill_bytes(&mut self, dest: &mut [u8]) -> Result<(), Error> {
        Ok(self.fill_bytes(dest))
    }
}
```

and use it in non-generic code.

> It is not clear this is doable soundly for generic methods.

Reviewer 2: It’s just a future possibility, so we can always figure out these details later, but I still don’t understand why this might not be possible to do. Is it just an implementation difficulty concern?

* Is not necessary unless we'd allow much more complex kinds of bounds. So it can be kept open as a future possibility, but for now there's no need.
* Does not quite work in Rust due to the constness then being early bound instead of late bound, cause all kinds of problems around closures and function calls.
* Technically cause two entirely separate MIR bodies to be generated, one for where the effect is on and one where it is off. On top of that it then theoretically allows you to call the const MIR body from non-const code.

Thus that approach was abandoned after proponents and opponents cooperated in trying to make the generic parameter approach work, resulting in all proponents becoming opponents, too.

### Sites where `const Trait` bounds can be used

Everywhere where non-const trait bounds can be written, but only for traits that are declared `const Trait`.

### Sites where `~const Trait` bounds can be used

* `const fn`
* `impl const Trait for Type`
* NOT in inherent impls, the individual `const fn` need to be annotated instead

> * associated types bounds of `const trait Trait` declarations

Reviewer 3: What about in the WCs of trait definitions, including in particular the `Self` supertrait bounds?

> * associated types bounds of `const trait Trait` declarations

Reviewer 3: What about in the WCs of trait definitions, including in particular the `Self` supertrait bounds?

I mention it because this is used in #3729.

        }
    }
}
```

... then we need to add a `~const Destruct` bound to `T`, to ensure
`NewType<T>` can be dropped.

This bound in turn will be infectious to all generic users of `NewType` like

```rust
const fn add<T: ~const Add>(
    a: NewType<T>,
    b: NewType<T>,
) -> Result<NewType<T::Output>, Error> {
    a + b
}
```

which now need a `T: ~const Destruct` bound, too.
In practice we have noticed that a large portion of APIs will have a `~const Destruct` bound.
This bound has little value as an explicit bound that appears almost everywhere.
Especially since it is a fairly straight forward assumption that a type that has const trait impls will also have a `const Drop` impl or only contain `const Destruct` types.

In the future we will also want to support `dyn ~const Trait` bounds, which invariably will require the type to implement `~const Destruct` in order to fill in the function pointer for the `drop` slot in the vtable.
While that can in generic contexts always be handled by adding more `~const Destruct` bounds, it would be more similar to how normal `dyn` safety
works if there were implicit `~const Destruct` bounds for (most?) `~const Trait` bounds.

> Thus we give all `const trait`s a `~const Destruct` super trait to ensure users don't need to add `~const Destruct` bounds everywhere.

Reviewer 3: In working through some examples, I find that the other place that `~const Destruct` bounds are needed rather pervasively is on associated types.  E.g. (simplified):

```rust
const trait FnOnce<Arg> {
    type Output: ~const Destruct;
    fn call_once(self, arg: Arg) -> Self::Output;
}
```

The idea, I gather, is to leave these to be written explicitly?

Reviewer 5: I think a possible solution to this and to the issue that many traits don't need a `~const Destruct` super trait is to operate the same way that having a type `&'a T` implicitly adds a `T: 'a` bound: automatically add `~const Destruct` bounds on all types that are function argument/return types. so, e.g.:
```rust
pub const trait AsRef<T: ?Sized> { // no implicit `~const Destruct` bound
    fn as_ref(&self) -> &T;
}
pub const trait Default {
    fn default() -> Self; // `Self` is a function's return type, so add `Self: ~const Destruct`
}
pub const trait FnOnce<Arg> {
    type Output;
    // `self` is an argument, so add `Self: ~const Destruct`
    // `arg` is an argument, so add `Arg: ~const Destruct`
    // `Self::Output` is a return type, so add `Self::Output: ~const Destruct`.
    fn call_once(self, arg: Arg) -> Self::Output;
}
```

I'm not sure if those bounds should be added to the trait, or merely to the trait's methods, or some combination of that. There should probably be a way to opt-out of adding implicit bounds.

Reviewer 5: `dyn Trait` could also have `~const Destruct` bounds deduced, inspired by how `dyn Trait` lifetime deduction works:
`&dyn Trait` and `&mut dyn Trait` both default to not having `~const Destruct` bounds (similar to how they default to having the same lifetime as the reference), other `dyn Trait` default to having `~const Destruct` bounds (similar to how it defaults to being `'static`).

invoking builtin operators. This same concern had been brought up for the `const fn` stabilization
[7 years ago](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/24111#issuecomment-385046163).

Basically what we can do is create

```rust
trait ConstDefault {
    const DEFAULT: Self;
}
```

and require users to use

```rust
const FOO: Vec<u8> = ConstDefault::DEFAULT;
```

instead of

```rust
const fn FOO: Vec<u8> = Default::default();
```

This duplication is what this RFC is suggesting to avoid.

Since it has already been possible to do all of this on stable Rust for years, and no major
crates have popped and gotten used widely, I assume that is either because

* it's too much duplication, or
* everyone was waiting for the work (that this RFC wants to stabilize) to finish, or
* both.

So while it is entirely possible that rejecting this RFC and deciding not to go down this route
will lead to an ecosystem for const operations to be created, it would result in duplication and
inconsistencies that we'd rather like to avoid.

Such an ecosystem would also make `const fn` obsolete, as every `const fn` can in theory be represented

> as a trait, it would just be very different to use from normal rust code and not really allow nice abstractions to be built.

Reviewer 2: `const` generics has limitations, so no, it would not make `const fn` obsolete…

Author: "Redundant" may be the better word. And yes, we'd need more const generics features

A full example how how

```rust
const trait Foo: ~const Bar + Baz {}

impl const Foo for () {}

const fn foo<T: ~const Foo>() -> T {
    // cannot call `Baz` methods
    <T as Bar>::bar()
}

const _: () = foo();
```

```rust
const trait Foo: Bar + ?const Baz {}

impl const Foo for () {}

#[next_const_fn]
const fn foo<T: Foo>() -> T {
    // cannot call `Baz` methods
    <T as Bar>::bar()
}

const _: () = foo();
```

This can be achieved across an edition by having some intermediate syntax like prepending `#[next_const]` attributes to all const fn that are using the new syntax, and having a migration lint that suggests adding it to every `const fn` that has trait bounds.

Then in the following edition, we can forbid the `#[next_const]` attribute and just make it the default.

The disadvantage of this is that by default, it creates stricter bounds than desired.

```rust
const fn foo<T: Foo>() {
    T::ASSOC_CONST
}
```

compiles today, and allows all types that implement `Foo`, irrespective of the constness of the impl.
With the opt-out scheme that would still compile, but suddenly require callers to provide a const impl.

> The safe default (and the one folks are used to for a few years now on stable), is that trait bounds just work, you just
> can't call methods on them.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
The alternative proposed above (and the one folks are used to for a few years now on stable), is that trait bounds mean the same on all functions, you just can't call methods on them in `const fn`.
```
safe/unsafe has a specific meaning in Rust which does not apply here.

This is both useful in

* nudging function authors to using the minimal necessary bounds to get their function
body to compile and thus requiring as little as possible from their callers,
* ensuring our implementation is correct by default.

> The implementation correctness argument is partially due to our history with `?const` (see https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/83452 for where we got it wrong and thus decided to stop using opt-out), and partially with our history with `?` bounds not being great either (https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/135229, https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/132209). An opt-in is much easier to make sound and keep sound.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
The implementation correctness argument is partially due to our history with `const fn` trait bounds (see https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/83452 for where we got "reject all trait bounds" wrong and thus decided to stop using opt-out). An opt-in is much easier to make sound and keep sound.
```

- Feature Name: `const_trait_methods`
- Start Date: 2024-12-13
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#67792](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/67792)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Make trait methods callable in const contexts. This includes the following parts:

> * Allow marking `trait` declarations as const implementable.

Author: You either need to declare the trait as const, or, as an alternative, declare which trait methods are const. This is necessary, as otherwise, when you have a `T: ~const Trait`, you don't know which methods you can call.

> * Allow marking `trait` declarations as const implementable.

Reviewer 27: The obvious design to me is that if a specific method is supposed to be "always const for all impls" then it should be declared const fn on that method.

```rust
trait Foo {
  fn thing();

  const fn always_const()
}
```

And then `impl Foo` has runtime `thing` const `always_const`, while `const impl Foo` has *both* methods as const

> * Allow marking `trait` declarations as const implementable.

Reviewer 16: If could declare `~const` trait bounds for arbitrary traits, this code would break after the addition of the `Foo::non_const` method:

```
trait Foo {
  fn non_const() { /* do something non-const here, since the validity of `Foo` does not rely on `non_const` being const. */ }
}

// --- downstream crate --- //

impl const Foo for () {}

const fn test<T: ~const Foo>() {}
```

It would either turn into an error at the impl site, or at `test`'s callsite. Both are bad.

`#[const_trait]` prevents this by making it the *trait's* obligation that all defaulted method bodies are const by default, to ensure that const impls stay const after the addition of new defaulted trait methods.

> * Allow marking `trait` declarations as const implementable.

Reviewer 27: I must be completely misunderstanding something.

why would I, as a programmer, ever want to have to say a trait "might be" cont.

why would i ever want to *disallow* a future programmer from writing a const impl of a particular trait?

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

## Nomenclature and new syntax concepts

### Const trait impls

It is now allowed to prefix a trait name in an impl block with `const`, marking that this `impl`'s type is now allowed to
have methods of this `impl`'s trait to be called in const contexts (if all where bounds hold, like ususal, but more on this later).

An example looks as follows:

```rust
impl const Trait for Type {}
```

Such impls require that the trait is a `const trait`.

All method bodies in a const trait impl are [const contexts](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/const_eval.html#const-context).

### Const traits

Traits need to opt-in to being allowed to have const trait impls. Thus you need to declare your traits by prefixing the `trait` keyword with `const`:

```rust
const trait Trait {}
```

This in turn checks all methods' default bodies as if they were `const fn`, making them callable in const contexts.
Impls can now rely on the default methods being const, too, and don't need to override them with a const body.

> We may add an attribute later to allow you to mark individual trait methods as not-const so that when creating a const trait, one can

Reviewer 28: Could this also be modelled with this RFC by having a const super trait and a non-const subtrait with a `: const Super` bound?

Author: Yes, splitting into two traits is absolutely possible. You can do this on nightly already: https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=e3eefc8e26e5fa4701754ec5062f762f

```rust
#![feature(const_trait_impl)]
#[const_trait]
trait Foo: Bar {
    fn foo() {}
}

trait Bar {
    fn bar() {}
}

impl Foo for () {}
impl Bar for () {}

const MOO: () = {
    <()>::foo();
    <()>::bar(); // error
};

fn main() {
    MOO;
    <()>::foo();
    <()>::bar()
}
```

Reviewer 28: I just saw this is discussed later on, perhaps it could mention here that it comes up later

```rust
const trait Default {
    fn default() -> Self;
}

impl const Default for () {
    fn default() {}
}

impl<T: Default> Default for Box<T> {
    fn default() -> Self { Box::new(T::default()) }
}

// This function requires a `const` impl for the type passed for T,
// even if called from a non-const context
const fn default<T: const Default>() -> T {
    T::default()
}

const _: () = default();

fn main() {
    let _: Box<u32> = default();
    //~^ ERROR: <Box<u32> as Default>::default cannot be called at compile-time
}
```

What we instead want is that, just like `const fn` can be called at runtime and compile time, we want their trait bounds' constness
to mirror that behaviour. So we're introducing `~const Trait` bounds, which mean "const if called from const context" (slight oversimplifcation, but read on).

The only thing we need to change in our above example is the `default` function, changing the `const Default` bound to a `~const Default` one.

```rust
const fn default<T: ~const Default>() -> T {
    T::default()
}
```

`~const` is derived from "approximately", meaning "maybe" in this context, or specifically "const impl required if called in const context".

> It is the opposite of `?` (prexisting for `?Sized` bounds), which also means "maybe", but from the other direction: `?const` (not proposed here, see the alternatives section for why it was rejected) would mean "no const impl required, even if called in const context".

Reviewer 29: _Inlined from earlier comment_

In this proposal `const fn foo<T: ~const Bar>()` is a function that is `const` when `Bar` is `const impl`'ed for `T`. This doesn't feel very consistent to me, as `const fn` implies to me that the function is _always_ `const`. Likewise, I don't like that `const trait Bar { ... }` is a trait that _may_ be `const impl`'ed, but isn't required to be `const`. Here's what I propose as a way to make this all feel more consistent (in my opinion!)

1. `const` means something _must_ be `const` under all conditions.
2. `~const` means something will be `const` under certain conditions.
3. Without `const` or `~const`, a signature implies non-`const`, while a bound implies indifference to `const`.

Below is my justification for this belief. The tl;dr is I believe the syntax would be more consistent, and allow for sensible implied clauses without sacrificing API clarity.

```rust
// Function is const under all circumstances.
// This implies T: const Bar and S: const Baz
const fn foo<T: Bar, S: Baz>() { ... }

// Function is const if all trait implementations are const.
// This implies T: ~const Bar and S: ~const Baz
~const fn foo<T: Bar, S: Baz>() { ... }

// Function is not const.
// T could have a const or non-const implementation of Bar, likewise for S and Baz
fn foo<T: Bar, S: Baz>() { ... }
```

<details>
  <summary>Details and examples</summary>
  
Applied to trait definitions:

```rust
// Trait is always const and must be implemented const
const trait Foo {};

// Trait may be const if it is implemented const
~const trait Foo {};

// Trait is never const
trait Foo {};
```

Users would then implement the trait using one of three blocks:

```rust
// The implementation is always const
impl const Foo for Bar {}

// The implementation may be const if possible (see below for discussion on this point)
impl ~const Foo for Bar {}

// The implementation is never const
impl Foo for Bar {}
```

When applied to bounds on functions, we get a side-effect in that the bounds on the trait can be entirely elided:

```rust
// Function is always const, therefore all trait implementations must always be const
const fn baz<T: Foo>() {}

// Function is const if all trait implementations are also const
~const fn baz<T: Foo>() {}

// Function is never const
fn baz<T: Foo>() {}
```

Users can still opt to use this proposal's trait bounds syntax where the requirements on a trait are stricter than the context of the signature:

```rust
// Non-const function requires that T has a const implementation of Foo
fn baz<T: const Foo>() {}

// Non-const function passing T into a ~const function. Allows compiler to use the const implementation if applicable
fn baz<T: ~const Foo>() {}

// Maybe-const function requires that T has a const implementation of Foo
~const fn baz<T: const Foo>() {}
```

This raises the question, how do you opt out of the implied `const` bound? I believe you'd never need to. Imagine `T: !const Foo` means means an implementation of `Foo` which is not `const`:

```rust
// ERROR: Non-const trait in const context
const fn baz<T: !const Foo>() {}

// Will never be const, so equivalent to fn baz<T: Foo>() {}
~const fn baz<T: !const Foo>() {}

// Seems pointless to me? Why would you want to declare code can't be const? Discuss!
fn baz<T: !const Foo>() {}
``` 

</details>

Reviewer 16: Copied from above:

```
// Function is const under all circumstances.
// This implies T: const Bar and S: const Baz
const fn foo<T: Bar, S: Baz>() { ... }
```

(I'm pretty sure that) this is literally impossible to implement backwards compatibly. You can already write `const fn foo<T: Bar, S: Baz>()` today, and that doesn't require const impls for `Bar` or `Baz`.

Reviewer 29: @compiler-errors Thanks for pointing that out for me! I'm still new to commenting on RFCs!

> This is literally impossible to implement backwards compatibly. You can already write `const fn foo<T: Bar, S: Baz>()` today, and that doesn't require `const` impls for `Bar` or `Baz`.

That's a good point, the implied bounds couldn't be included then. I do still feel that `~const fn` should be required for using `T: ~const Foo` bounds. I don't like the implication that the `const` function becomes non-`const` in monomorphisation.

Reviewer 16: > I don't like the implication that the const function becomes non-const in monomorphisation.

That's already true today if you call a const function with non-const arguments, tho.

Reviewer 29: I don't mean that the value is computed at compile time, I mean that the function monomorphisation isn't valid `const` anymore. For example:

```rust
impl const Default for Foo { ... }

impl Default for Bar { ... }

const fn build<T: ~const Default>() -> T {
    T::default()
}

fn main() {
    let a = build::<Foo>();
    let b = build::<Bar>();
}
```

Both `a` and `b` are evaluated at runtime (compiler could optimise but I'm ignoring that for now), that's fine by me. The issue is the `Default` implementation for `Bar` could do non-`const` things (allocate a bunch of memory, do syscalls, etc.), but the signature of `build` implies it _is_ a `const` function, and therefore free of those kinds of side effects.

It feels strange to me that if you inlined the definition of `Bar::default` into `build`, you don't get a `const fn` anymore, despite being defined as a `const fn`.

Reviewer 5: I expect there to be circumstances where you want a `const` function with non-`const` generic arguments, e.g. a cdylib plugin or a Linux kernel module:
```rust
#[repr(C)]
pub struct ApiStruct {
    pub alloc: extern "C" fn(a: u32, b: f32) -> NonNull<c_void>;
    pub free: unsafe extern "C" fn(v: Option<NonNull<c_void>>);
    pub debug: unsafe extern "C" fn(
        v: NonNull<c_void>,
        write_str: unsafe extern "C" fn(state: *mut c_void, bytes: *const u8, len: usize) -> bool,
        state: *mut c_void,
    ) -> bool;
}

pub trait Api: fmt::Debug {
    fn new(a: u32, b: f32) -> Box<Self>;
}

impl ApiStruct {
    pub const new<T: Api>() -> Self {
        extern "C" fn alloc<T: Api>(a: u32, b: f32) -> NonNull<c_void> {
            Box::into_raw(T::new(a, b)).cast::<c_void>()
        }
        unsafe extern "C" fn free<T: Api>(v: Option<NonNull<c_void>>) {
            drop(v.map(|v| unsafe { Box::from_raw(v.as_ptr().cast<T>()) }));
        }
        unsafe extern "C" fn debug<T: Api>(
            v: NonNull<c_void>,
            write_str: unsafe extern "C" fn(state: *mut c_void, bytes: *const u8, len: usize) -> bool,
            state: *mut c_void,
        ) -> bool {
            struct Writer {
                write_str: unsafe extern "C" fn(state: *mut c_void, bytes: *const u8, len: usize) -> bool,
                state: *mut c_void,
            }
            impl fmt::Write for Writer {
                fn write_str(&mut self, s: &str) -> fmt::Result {
                    unsafe {
                        if (self.write_str)(self.state, s.as_bytes().as_ptr(), s.len()) {
                            Ok(())
                        } else {
                            Err(fmt::Error)
                        }
                    }
                }
            }
            unsafe { write!(Writer { write_str, state }, "{:?}", v.cast::<T>().as_ref()).is_ok() }
        }
        Self {
            alloc: alloc::<T>,
            free: free::<T>,
            debug: debug::<T>,
        }
    }
}

#[unsafe(no_mangle)]
pub static THE_API: ApiStruct = ApiStruct::new::<MyApiImpl>();
```

Author: An example from libstd today is [the impl block of Vec::new](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/1ab85fbd7474e8ce84d5283548f21472860de3e2/library/alloc/src/vec/mod.rs#L406) which has an implicit `A: Allocator` bound from [the type definition](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/1ab85fbd7474e8ce84d5283548f21472860de3e2/library/alloc/src/vec/mod.rs#L397).

> as `const fn` implies to me that the function is _always_ `const`.

It is, you can call it from a const context, it will just fail some trait bounds. This is no different from 

```rust
const fn dup<T: Copy>(a: T) -> (T, T) {(a, a)}
const FOO: (String, String) = dup(String::new());
```

Here `dup` is always const fn, you'll just get a trait bound failure if thr type you pass isn't `Copy`.

I know this may seem like language lawyering, but that's

* how the impl works
* how I think we should be talking about it, because it's actually important for inference and method resolution in the nonconst world today. You first figure out which method you're calling, then you check its bounds. Otherwise it would at least seem like we'd have to allow some SFINAE or method overloading style things, which we definitely do not

Reviewer 29: I think those are good points well articulated, thanks! I suppose this is an example where _I_ would need to better familiarize myself with the semantics around `const fn` and how it relates to `~const` trait bounds.

### `~const Destruct` trait

The `Destruct` trait enables dropping types within a const context.

```rust
const fn foo<T>(t: T) {
    // `t` is dropped here, but we don't know if we can evaluate its `Drop` impl (or that of its fields' types)
}
const fn baz<T: Copy>(t: T) {
    // Fine, `Copy` implies that no `Drop` impl exists
}
const fn bar<T: ~const Destruct>(t: T) {
    // Fine, we can safely invoke the destructor of `T`.
}
```

When a value of a generic type goes out of scope, it is dropped and (if it has one) its `Drop` impl gets invoked.
This situation seems no different from other trait bounds, except that types can be dropped without implementing `Drop`
(as they can contain types that implement `Drop`). In that case the type's drop glue is invoked.

The `Destruct` trait is a bound for whether a type has drop glue. This is trivally true for all types.

`~const Destruct` trait bounds are satsifed only if the type has a `const Drop` impl or all of the types of its components

> are `~const Destruct`.

Reviewer 30: This seems like a backwards compatibility hazard, similar to the existing auto traits (i.e. `Send` and `Sync`): If a struct has only `~const Destruct` fields (and no own `Drop` implementation), then adding a field with a non-const `Drop` would break backwards compatibility.

The definition of which types implement `~const Destruct` also seems wrong, I assume it should be "all components are `~const Destruct` _**and**_, if it exists, the `Drop` impl must be `const`.

I assume the `: const Destruct` (no "maybe") is also a valid bound?

Reviewer 3: > This seems like a backwards compatibility hazard, similar to the existing auto traits (i.e. `Send` and `Sync`): If a struct has only `~const Destruct` fields (and no own `Drop` implementation), then adding a field with a non-const `Drop` would break backwards compatibility.

It already is, on stable Rust.  If we have:

```rust
pub struct S {
    x: u8,
}

// Somewhere else:

const fn f(_: S) {}
```

And then add a field:

```rust
pub struct S {
    x: u8,
    y: Box<()>,
}

// Somewhere else:

const fn f(_: S) {}
//~^ ERROR destructor of `S` cannot be evaluated at compile-time
```

While an associated type is very close to how the implementation works, neither `effect = const` nor `effect: const` are representing the logic correctly,
as `const` implies `~const`, but `~const` is nothing concrete, it's more like a generic parameter referring to the constness of the function.
Fully expanded one can think of

```rust
const fn foo<T: ~const Trait + const OtherTrait>(t: T) { ... }
```

to be like

```rust
const<const C: bool> fn foo<T>(t: T)
where
    T: Trait + OtherTrait,
    <T as Trait>::bikeshed#effect = const<C>,
    <T as OtherTrait>::bikeshed#effect = const<true>,
{
    ...
}
```

Note that `const<true>` implies `const<false>` and thus also `for<C> const<C>`, just like `const Trait` implies `~const Trait`.

We do not know of any cases where such an explicit syntax would be useful (only makes sense if you can do math on the bool),
so a more reduced version could be

```rust
const fn foo<T>(t: T)
where
    T: Trait + OtherTrait,
    <T as Trait>::bikeshed#effect = ~const,
    <T as OtherTrait>::bikeshed#effect = const,
{
    ...
}
```

or

```rust
const fn foo<T: Trait<bikeshed#effect = ~const> + OtherTrait<bikeshed#effect = const>>(t: T) { ... }
```

> ## Make all `const fn` arguments `~const Trait` by default and require an opt out `?const Trait`

Reviewer 31: I think this needs to be expanded on quite a bit more in the main text.

Up until reading this section, I actually hadn't really considered the examples below. I think it's really important describe better the different ways you might use a const (or maybe const) trait both inside and outside of `const` contexts. The main text does a bit to motivate the need to distinguish between const and maybe-const bounds, but does not really go into why you need the distinguish between maybe-const and not-const bounds. The first example below hints a bit at it, but in my opinion is pretty incomplete. For my own sake, I expanded the first example below to make it work on nightly and to show how the code must change between going from with non-const bounds (https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=25b7e140187aca91a5ce377b42f86140) and without (https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=7ce4396310758e4595704e4228f45d69). Now, what this doesn't do, for me, is show why being able to write the non-const bound version is actually *useful*. A real-world example would go far here.

----

Now, going into this RFC, I was strongly in favor of this alternative (and still do favor it, though am slightly convinced by the associated const example below), for two reasons:

First, I expect the maybe-const bound to be what users want in the overwhelming majority of cases. In that sense, having "extra" noise to the syntax of bounds results in a reduced user experience. Though, as a counterpoint, the explicitness of them being "different" from what you see elsewhere *is* nice.

Second, `~const` bounds *are* new _weird_ syntax. And, for many, Rust already has a lot of weird syntax, so we should be wary about adding *more*. On the contrary, users are already used to `?Sized` bounds, so `?const` bounds is not that weird or different. I am *very* unconvinced by argument below that this ~const syntax is "the one folks are used to for a few years now": 1) I expect plenty of people that will eventually use this don't actually use this on nightly 2) being "used to" a syntax does not automatically make it best.

Reviewer 32: > Second, `~const` bounds _are_ new _weird_ syntax. And, for many, Rust already has a lot of weird syntax, so we should be wary about adding _more_. On the contrary, users are already used to `?Sized` bounds, so `?const` bounds is not that weird or different. I am _very_ unconvinced by argument below that this ~const syntax is "the one folks are used to for a few years now": 1) I expect plenty of people that will eventually use this don't actually use this on nightly 2) being "used to" a syntax does not automatically make it best.

I was going to write similar will piggyback on this instead. `~const` reads to me very strongly as "not" or something along those lines, since `~` is bitwise not in C/++ and indicates a destructor in C++, and I think this is likely to be more understood by users than `~` meaning maybe. Not that we should necessarily base any syntax decisions off of C/++, but I don't know that a percentage of users being familiar with a nightly syntax makes that strong of a case either.

The `?` reads much stronger to me as "maybe", as in `?Sized` = "maybe sized" and `?const` = "maybe const".

This syntax was discussed recently at https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/328082-t-lang.2Feffects/topic/Nadri's.20effect.20elision, and reasons came up for using `~` over `?`. But reading again - I think these reasons were implying that if `~const` were changed to `?const` then the exact semantics should be updated to nearly the same as `?Sized`. That is, the assumption that changing the syntax would imply `const trait` by default and `?const trait` opts out, similar to `Sized` by default. However, I don't expect the correlation to go that deep: we can put "read `?foo` as `maybe foo`" in the reference and put "`?` has different semantics for trait bounds vs. effects" in the nomicon.

Author: Yes, in an ideal world we'd do that, I mean, my original RFC from years ago proposed that. But that needs new syntax considering how many ppl are using nonconst bounds on const fns (and not just `Copy` bounds).

You need those when you just need access to assoc consts or types, or when your struct has bounds, as you need to replicate those on the impls, even if the specific const fns you wrote don't need them.

The reason we gave up on `?const` was that we messed up the impl, because we made the impl try to mirror that. Today's impl is `~const`, opting into the constness, which is much simpler impl wise. We can invert the syntax, but the impl is opposite that and just how traits work. Yes traits have `?Sized`, but that's a thing we regularly get wrong somewhere in the impl, and we already know that adding new opt out traits is a breaking change, just like adding opt out constness would be.

Author: > Second, `~const` bounds _are_ new _weird_ syntax. And, for many, Rust already has a lot of weird syntax, so we should be wary about adding _more_. On the contrary, users are already used to `?Sized` bounds, so `?const` bounds is not that weird or different. I am _very_ unconvinced by argument below that this ~const syntax is "the one folks are used to for a few years now":

I didn't say `~const` is what they are used to on nightly, but I see the ambiguity. What I meant was folks on stable are used to `T: Trait` bounds existing and giving you only static access to the trait items.

I'll adjust the text

Reviewer 9: `?const` for "must be const if called in const" makes very little sense to me as well. It looks like "we don't care whether this is const", but that's not what it models. (The syntax for "we don't care" in the RFC is just `T: Trait`.)

We definitely need 3 syntaxes, for 3 modes. If we want to avoid `~const` in favor of `?const`, I think the translation should be:

|English | RFC      | Alternative      |
| -- | ------------- | ------------- |
| Non-const impl suffices for all calls | `T: Trait` | `T: ?const Trait` |
| Const-impl required for const calls | `T: ~const Traut` | `T: Trait` |
| Const-impl always required | `T: const Trait` | `T: const Trait`

Note that I am talking just about syntax here; the implementation can stay exactly as it is right now in nightly. So I do not think the alternative is in any way an extra maintenance burden. It *is* however a breaking change in the meaning of `T: Trait` on a `const fn`, so it requires an edition transition.

Author: >  So I do not think the alternative is in any way an extra maintenance burden.

unfortunately it is, because we end up with an inverted logic where we need to make sure that we generate those conditionally-const bounds for just normal syntactical `T: Trait` bounds everywhere, instead of gating it on an extra syntax annotation. We've seen various failures to prevent `?RandomTrait` or `?Sized` in places where we didn't want it to be legal to specify them (e.g. because they were already the default in the case of `?Sized`).

Reviewer 9: All I am suggesting is to change the syntax.  The internal representation can remain exactly as it is right now inside the compiler. I don't see how that could possibly cause any issues outside the parser.

Author: Gating the addition of syntax is not the issue. The lack of syntax is my issue.

Yes, we can invert now. Now that the noninverted version has been built. My worry is about future additions or modifications. I'm seeing that we messed stuff up with `?Trait` and thus feel like we'll mess up `?const` more likely than `~const`

Reviewer 2: > Today's impl is `~const`, opting into the constness, which is much simpler impl wise.

It’s also simpler, IMO, for users to learn and understand. `: Trait` meaning different things in different contexts would be yet another subtle detail you have to keep in your head when reading code. Explicit unfamiliar syntax (`~const`) is preferable to implicit unfamiliar context-dependent behavior.

> how many ppl are using nonconst bounds on const fns (and not just `Copy` bounds).

This is also pretty convincing. Forcing people to write nonsense like `?const Copy` does not sound like a good idea.

Reviewer 9: > Gating the addition of syntax is not the issue. The lack of syntax is my issue.

Not sure what you mean. The meaning of `T: Trait` is always "must be const in const context". There is no lack of syntax.

> It’s also simpler, IMO, for users to learn and understand. : Trait meaning different things in different contexts

It doesn't mean different things in different contexts. It always means "when you call this from const, you need a const impl, otherwise any impl will do".

> This is also pretty convincing. Forcing people to write nonsense like ?const Copy does not sound like a good idea.

I am fairly sure that we will have *much* more `~const` functions than we have `?const` functions. The entire reason we are having this discussion is that  want to avoid littering  the ecosystem with `~const`. The shortest syntax should be used for the option needed most often; exceptional cases should need longer syntax. I am fairly sure by that measure, we want "must be const from const context" to be the default.

The other issue is that I haven't yet seen how conditionally const trait impls should look; the RFC is still missing that part I think. The consistent thing to do would be
```rust
impl<T: ~const PartialEq> ~const PartialEq for MyType<T> { ... }
```
which is yet more places that `~const` will be needed. We could use just `const` there but that would be inconsistent with using `~const` in `const fn`.

Reviewer 4: > I am fairly sure that we will have _much_ more `~const` functions than we have `?const` functions.

Perhaps you missed the Zulip comment I linked to above. Let's assume that we want to allow what would, under the current syntax, be `dyn (~)const Trait`, `impl (~)const Trait`, and `(~)const fn`.

How do you propose to use `?const` opt out syntax for the following use cases? Would you suggest us to write a migration lint for all the cases below?

```rust
trait Trait {}
impl Trait for () {}

fn something() {}

const fn foo1(x: &dyn Trait) {}
const fn foo2(x: &impl Trait) {}
const fn foo3<T: Trait>(x: &T) {}

// not wrapped
const fn foo4(x: fn()) {}
const fn bar4<T: Fn()>(x: T) {}
const X: fn() = something;

// wrapped
pub struct X(fn());
const fn foo5(x: X) {}
const X2: X = X(something);

const A: &'static dyn Trait = &();

const trait Foo: Trait {}

impl<T, A: Allocator> Vec<T, A> {
    pub const fn new_in(alloc: A) -> Self { todo!() }
    pub fn with_capacity_in(capacity: usize, alloc: A) -> Self { todo!() }
    // ^ bonus question here: if const alloc is a thing, how would we constify this fn?
}
```

Reviewer 9: Yes, an edition migration would have to add `?const` to all currently existing trait bounds, `impl Trait` and `dyn Trait` in a `const fn`.

The wrapped case is something I mentioned [elsewhere](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1921034988). I don't know where exactly the RFC intends to allow `~const`, but if it is allowed in function bounds and function types but not in ADT declarations, that is an expressiveness hole that I expect we have to close at some point.

Reviewer 4: > The wrapped case is something I mentioned [elsewhere](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1921034988). I don't know where exactly the RFC intends to allow `~const`, but if it is allowed in function bounds and function types but not in ADT declarations, that is an expressiveness hole that I expect we have to close at some point.

Right, but I'm asking about the proposed `?const` opt-out. If `fn()` is changed to mean "must be const if in compile time", then structs that have `fn()` should change to `?const fn()` as well to ensure maximum consistency. There are patterns that people use to store static data or configurations, and they will store function pointers for ones they intend to call in runtime. I've seen that pattern a lot.

And you are suggesting we implement some migration lint that looks at any type named in a const context, and suggest `?const` if any of those contain a fn pointer? Or a migration lint that suggests all function pointer types we name in the current rust version to become `?const fn`? Some structs' fields are meant to be used by downstream, and downstream users can use the struct in a const context.

Reviewer 9: Ah, good point. When we see a `fn` type anywhere outside a function signature we can't tell if this is ever meant to be used in `const` contexts.

Maybe the defaults should be different for static and dynamic dispatch (the latter being `fn()` and `dyn Trait` types), but that could also easily be confusing. The RFC says next to nothing about the vision for dynamic dispatch so it's hard to compare.

Reviewer 2: (in reply to https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1921627536)

> context-dependent syntax

With your proposal, in a normal `fn`, `: Trait` just means “requires `Trait`”, but in a `const fn`, it means “requires `Trait` in non-const context, and `const Trait` in a const context”. The context of `fn` vs `const fn` affects the meaning of the construct.

Reviewer 9: I already answer that above: The meaning of `T: Trait` under my proposal is always "must be const in const context". Some functions just cannot be called in const context. I see no reason to explain this in such a complicated way as you did.

Reviewer 2: >  less common cases

I don’t think it will be all that uncommon, because of marker traits with no `const` version. And I think e.g. `?const Copy` is far more likely to cause confusion than anything in this RFC’s syntax, on top of being a strict downgrade from the current edition.

Reviewer 4: > The RFC says next to nothing about the vision for dynamic dispatch so it's hard to compare.

My personal thinking is that `fn` pointers intended to be used in const contexts should be `~const fn`, and the same goes for `dyn ~const Fn()`. That to me makes it much more consistent, as compared to the opt-out which might require a split. That is one of the reasons I support `~const` (or any syntax for opt-in) over `?const` (or any syntax for opt-out).

        * Significantly would delay const trait stabilization (by years).
        * Usually requires editing the trait anyway, so there's no "can constify impls without trait author opt in" silver bullet.
    * New RTN-like per-method bounds: `T: Trait<some_fn(_): ~const>`.
        * Unclear if soundly possible.
        * Unclear if possible without incurring significant performance issues for all code (may need tracking new information for all functions out there).
        * Still requires editing traits.
        * Still want the `~const Trait` sugar anyway.

## Should we start out by allowing only const trait declarations and const trait impls

We do not need to immediately allow using methods on generic parameters of const fn, as a lot of const code is nongeneric.

The following example could be made to work with just const traits and const trait impls.

```rust
const fn foo() {
    let a = [1, 2, 3];
    let b = [1, 2, 4];
    if a == b {}
}
```

Things like `Option::map` could not be made const without const trait bounds, as they need to actually call the generic `FnOnce` argument.

> # Future possibilities

Reviewer: Should we mention closures here. CC https://github.com/rust-lang/project-const-traits/issues/10

You first figure out which method you're calling, then you check its bounds.
Otherwise it would at least seem like we'd have to allow some SFINAE or method overloading style things,
which we definitely do not support and have historically rejected over and over again.

### `~const Destruct` trait

The `Destruct` trait enables dropping types within a const context.

```rust
const fn foo<T>(t: T) {
    // `t` is dropped here, but we don't know if we can evaluate its `Drop` impl (or that of its fields' types)
}
const fn baz<T: Copy>(t: T) {
    // Fine, `Copy` implies that no `Drop` impl exists
}
const fn bar<T: ~const Destruct>(t: T) {
    // Fine, we can safely invoke the destructor of `T`.
}
```

When a value of a generic type goes out of scope, it is dropped and (if it has one) its `Drop` impl gets invoked.
This situation seems no different from other trait bounds, except that types can be dropped without implementing `Drop`
(as they can contain types that implement `Drop`). In that case the type's drop glue is invoked.

The `Destruct` trait is a bound for whether a type has drop glue. This is trivally true for all types.

> `~const Destruct` trait bounds are satsifed only if the type has a `const Drop` impl or all of the types of its components
> are `~const Destruct`.

Reviewer 30: ```suggestion
`~const Destruct` trait bounds are satisfied only if the type's `Drop` impl (if any) is `const` and all of the types of
its components are `~const Destruct`.
```

(This seems to be the currently implemented behavior and is what makes sense IMO: [playground](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=0939069a19d8c571d88771e6f9e69713))

}

const _: () = Default::default();

fn main() {
    let () = default();
    let () = compile_time_default();
    let () = Default::default();
}
```

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Const code is currently only able to use a small subset of Rust code, as many standard library APIs and builtin syntax things require calling trait methods to work.
As an example, in const contexts you cannot use even basic equality on anything but primitives:

```rust
const fn foo() {
    let a = [1, 2, 3];
    let b = [1, 2, 4];
    if a == b {} // ERROR: cannot call non-const operator in constant functions
}
```

## Background

This RFC requires familarity with "const contexts", so you may have to read [the relevant reference section](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/const_eval.html#const-context) first.

Calling functions during const eval requires those functions' bodies to only use statements that const eval can handle. While it's possible to just run any code until it hits a statement const eval cannot handle, that would mean the function body is part of its semver guarantees. Something as innocent as a logging statement would make the function uncallable during const eval.

> Thus we have a marker (`const`) to add in front of functions that requires the function body to only contain things const eval can handle. This in turn allows a `const` annotated function to be called from const contexts, as you now have a guarantee it will stay callable.

Reviewer 9: It is worth mentioning that we do defer *some* of these checks to const-eval time in a sense, such as determining whether `ptr.is_null()` can be executed. So our guarantee about things being const-callable is not 100% watertight. That's okay, it's not a load-bearing member for soundness, and we of course generally want to ensure const-evaluatability statically before we try to actually run the code, for the same reason that we prefer compilation errors over panics.

Author: The RFC as specified does not expose such situations, so I think we can ignore it for now.

It should be possible to write `default` in a way that allows it to be called in const contexts
for types whose `Default` impl's `default` method satisfies all rules that `const fn` must satisfy
(including some annotation that guarantees this won't break by accident).
It must always be possible to call `default` outside of const contexts with no limitations on the generic parameters that may be passed.

Similarly it should be possible to write `compile_time_default` in a way that also requires calls
outside of const contexts to only pass generic parameters whose `Default::default` method satisifies
the usual `const fn` rules. This is necessary in order to allow a const block
(which can access generic parameters) in the function body to invoke methods on the generic parameter.

So, we need some annotation that differentiates a `T: Default` bound from one that gives us the guarantees we're looking for.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

## Nomenclature and new syntax concepts

### Const trait impls

It is now allowed to prefix a trait name in an impl block with `const`, marking that this `impl`'s type is now allowed to

> have methods of this `impl`'s trait to be called in const contexts (if all where bounds hold, like ususal, but more on this later).

Reviewer 33: Typo: ususal

Reviewer 34: ```suggestion
have methods of this `impl`'s trait to be called in const contexts (if all where bounds hold, like usual, but more on this later).
```

We may add an attribute later to allow you to mark individual trait methods as not-const so that when creating a const trait, one can
add (defaulted or not) methods that cannot be used in const contexts.

It is possible to split up a trait into the const an non-const parts as discussed [here](#cant-have-const-methods-and-nonconst-methods-on-the-same-trait).

All default method bodies of const trait declarations are [const contexts](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/const_eval.html#const-context).

Note that on nightly the syntax is

```rust
#[const_trait]
trait Trait {}
```

and a result of this RFC would be that we would remove the attribute and add the `const trait` syntax.

### Const trait bounds

Any item that can have trait bounds can also have `const Trait` bounds.

Examples:

* `T: const Trait`, requiring any type that `T` is instantiated with to have a const trait impl.
* `dyn const Trait`, requiring any type that is unsized to this dyn trait to have a const trait impl.
    * These are not part of this RFC because they require `const fn` function pointers. See [the Future Possibilities section](#future-possibilities).
* `impl const Trait` (in all positions).

>     * These are not part of this RFC because they require `const fn` function pointers. See [the Future Possibilities section](#future-possibilities).

Reviewer 9: I dont get the connection between `impl const Trait` and `const fn`, this is static dispatch, not dynamic dispatch.

> * `trait Foo: const Bar {}`, requiring every type that has an impl for `Foo` (even a non-const one), to also have a const trait impl for `Bar`.

Reviewer 2: With this RFC in its current state, `Copy` unfortunately does not imply `const Clone`. I don’t know how likely this is to cause problems in practice, or how difficult it would be to fix, but it probably deserves a mention at least.

Reviewer 16: Probably on the same order of difficulty as fixing the fact that `impl Copy for T` and `impl Clone for T` may have diverging behaviors, i.e. the latter could have observable side-effects. Would prefer if we didn't fix it for now though.

the constness of the corresponding trait bound. E.g.

```rust
struct Foo;

impl Clone for Foo {
    fn clone(&self) -> Self {
        Foo
    }
}

const fn bar<T: ~const Clone>(t: &T) -> T { t.clone() }
const BAR: Foo = bar(Foo); // ERROR: `Foo`'s `Clone` impl is not for `const Clone`.
```

But `bar` is still a `const` fn and you can call it from a const context, it will just fail some trait bounds. This is no different from 

```rust
const fn dup<T: Copy>(a: T) -> (T, T) {(a, a)}
const FOO: (String, String) = dup(String::new());
```

Here `dup` is always const fn, you'll just get a trait bound failure if the type you pass isn't `Copy`.

This may seem like language lawyering, but that's how the impl works and how we should be talking about it.

It's actually important for inference and method resolution in the nonconst world today.
You first figure out which method you're calling, then you check its bounds.
Otherwise it would at least seem like we'd have to allow some SFINAE or method overloading style things,
which we definitely do not support and have historically rejected over and over again.

> ### `~const Destruct` trait

Reviewer 2: Maybe this should just be `~const Drop`? `Drop` bounds in their present form are completely useless, so repurposing them would make sense. `Drop` would be implemented by every currently existing type, and `~const Drop` only by ones that can be dropped in `const` contexts.

(Overall, very impressed by this RFC. It addresses essentially all the concerns I thought I might have going in. Thank you @oli-obk and team for all your hard work!)

Author: Yea  that would be neat. But it needs an edition and giving the ppl that needed `T: Drop` bounds the ability to still do whatever they were doing

Reviewer 2: > the ppl that needed `T: Drop` bounds

Are there any such people at all?

Reviewer 16: I still think it's very useful conceptually to split `Destruct` and `Drop` since the former is structural and the latter really isn't -- it's more like an "`OnDrop`" handler. If we moved to `~const Drop`, in order to write a well-formed `~const Drop` impl, you need to write `where {all of my fields}: ~const Drop` in the where clause.

That is to say, there's a very good reason we split `~const Destruct` out of `~const Drop` in the first place :)

Reviewer 2: > it's more like an "`OnDrop`" handler.

Yeah, that’s what it is *right now*, but we could expand its meaning.

> in order to write a well-formed `~const Drop` impl, you need to write `where {all of my fields}: ~const Drop` in the where clause.

The bound could always be made implicitly inferred. `Drop` is extremely magic already, why not a little more?

But actually, I think it’s a *good* thing that these bounds can be specified explicitly, because it enables library authors to leave room for adding or changing private fields in the future. I could see allowing `impl Drop`/`impl const Drop` blocks with no `fn drop()` method, that serve only to add restrictions on dropping in `const` contexts.

Reviewer 2: Currently, `Drop` is an “anti-trait”—implementing it makes your type *less* capable. I’m proposing to turn it into a normal auto trait from the point of view of the type system, where only the `impl` blocks are weird.

Author: That seems like an orthogonal change to me. We still need to know the difference inside the compiler, as we need to decide whether you can Destructure a type or not (presence of a Drop trait), and separately need to know if a type has drop glue (meaning it contains Drop types somewhere in its fields or its fields' types recursively). So all we're talking about here is more capabilities for users to control drop and/or whether the `Destruct` trait should be a private libcore trait and we should use magic in the parsing/lowering code to turn `Drop` bounds into `Destruct` bounds.

Reviewer 4: > `Drop` bounds in their present form are completely useless, so repurposing them would make sense.

That is not true. `T: Drop` bounds can be used to ensure that a type has/does not have a drop impl. This is notably used in `pin-project`: https://github.com/taiki-e/pin-project/blob/b8e1b1640fa0edd0b27da9e084bec827eb927f2d/pin-project-internal/src/lib.rs#L107-L132

To make a large change like this, we must be able to accommodate existing uses of this. I know this use case experimenting with `~const Drop`. I don't see an easy solution here without at least two traits (`Drop` and `Destruct`).

Reviewer 4: > It would still be possible to change the meaning of `: Drop` over an edition

Right, so before we have a consensus on how that would look like, having both `Destruct` and `Drop` feels completely fine for me. Since we just want to know whether something can be dropped (`T: ~const Destruct`) and we know that we will accommodate any existing uses of the `Drop` bound and impls, any reformulating of how that works can still be done through an edition even if we choose to add `Destruct` here.

Reviewer 34: Changing how random trait bounds of otherwise typical traits are presented, even over an edition, is not useful. It's not Fn, FnMut, FnOnce, or Sized. The mistake isn't that you can write a Drop bound, it's that Drop was handled by a typical trait, despite having atypical needs, and was not given special treatment to begin with. That is something you cannot simply change over an edition.

Reviewer 2: @workingjubilee Can you elaborate? To be clear, my suggestion is that `Drop`  *should* be like a normal trait (at least in terms of its trait bounds). The “magical special case” I suggested would be only for old editions, to preserve compatibility for the small number of people relying on the current not-like-a-normal-trait behavior (where a type  satisfying the `Drop` bound is *less* capable than one that does not).

Reviewer 34: ??? Perhaps I misunderstood something?

Reviewer 2: Current `Drop`: trait bound satisfied only when an explicit `impl` exists. Such an `impl` *must* contain an `fn drop()`. Adding such an `impl` makes the type less capable.

Proposed `Drop`: trait bound are always satisfied on new editions (like this RFC’s `Destruct`). Bare `: Drop` bounds retain their current behavior on old editions (with a warning), for compatibility. `~const Drop` bounds behave like this RFC’s `~const Destruct` on all editions. Conceptually: when implementing `Drop` manually, you override the default impl (like with an auto trait). An explicit `impl` *may* specify `~const` bounds, or an `fn drop()` handler. Adding such a handler implicitly (a) makes the type ineligible for destructuring, and (b) unimplements auto trait `TrivialDrop`.

Reviewer 35: As someone who has spent much time helping people getting their hands on Rust, I'd like to second this.

I feel like having a `Destruct` trait which is used only in this case but is different than `Drop` (which you should not use in bounds anyway) is really confusing. This is not something that you can understand without knowing about rustc internals or the language history goes backward to the language great consistency.

Most people just want to know "can I drop this at compile time or not", they don't care if it is because of a manual `Drop` impl or drop glue. `Drop` is already a special trait, I think we can make it mean something else for `~const` bounds (and maybe change it later for normal bounds).

In short, I think that adding `~const Destruct` instead of `~const Drop` would make the language harder to understand.

The `Destruct` trait enables dropping types within a const context.

```rust
const fn foo<T>(t: T) {
    // `t` is dropped here, but we don't know if we can evaluate its `Drop` impl (or that of its fields' types)
}
const fn baz<T: Copy>(t: T) {
    // Fine, `Copy` implies that no `Drop` impl exists
}
const fn bar<T: ~const Destruct>(t: T) {
    // Fine, we can safely invoke the destructor of `T`.
}
```

When a value of a generic type goes out of scope, it is dropped and (if it has one) its `Drop` impl gets invoked.
This situation seems no different from other trait bounds, except that types can be dropped without implementing `Drop`
(as they can contain types that implement `Drop`). In that case the type's drop glue is invoked.

> The `Destruct` trait is a bound for whether a type has drop glue. This is trivally true for all types.

Author: That's one avenue for linear types, but there are probably more ergonomic ones. I'd rather leave that discussion to the folk who have put in more than just a few thoughts into this, i.e. not me

You can write const trait impls of many standard library traits for your own types.
While it was often possible to write the same code in inherent methods, operators were
covered by traits from `std::ops` and thus not avaiable for const contexts.
Most of the time it suffices to add `const` before the trait name in the impl block.
The compiler will guide you and suggest where to also
add `~const` bounds for trait bounds on generic parameters of methods or the impl.

Similarly you can make your traits available for users of your crate to implement constly.
Note that this will change your semver guarantees: you are now guaranteeing that any future
methods you add don't just have a default body, but a `const` default body. The compiler will
enforce this, so you can't accidentally make a mistake, but it may still limit how you can
extend your trait without having to do a major version bump.
Most of the time it suffices to add `const` before the `trait` declaration. The compiler will
guide you and suggest where to also add `~const` bounds for super trait bounds or trait bounds
on generic parameters of your trait or your methods.

> # Reference-level explanation

Reviewer 9: (Not sure where to put this but making this an inlne comment for better threading)

Where exactly can `~const` bounds be used? It sounds like they can only be used in fn bounds, not in type declarations (I assume; the RFC doesn't say though but what would it even mean to put this outside a fn bound). but then what if I want to write a newtype containing `Box<dyn ~const Trait>`?
Formally speaking I think what  we have here is that bounds and (with `dyn ~const Trait`) types appearing in fn signatures can now implicitly depend on the surrounding constnness, but user-defined types cannot. So there's an expressivity gap here. not sure if it is relevant, but I feel like `dyn ~const Trait` and `~const fn` do need a very careful dedicated look and should likely be added in the future.

Even without `dyn`, this comes up if one wants to write `struct S<T: ~const Trait>`, but bounds on types are fairly rare so maybe it's not such a big deal if the MVP does not have this. I disagree with the RFC where it says that such bounds make no sense. They make a lot of sense: the type becomes generic over a `<const C: bool>` similar to what happens in the desugaring for `const fn` and their bounds.

Reviewer 13: On that note, given that type aliases are pretty much copy-and-paste I suspect that `type Foo = Box<dyn ~const Trait>;` would work by default. We may want to be explicit about whether we want that.

Reviewer 2: Anything involving `const`ness-parametrized concrete types runs into the issues I mention at https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1921133856, and therefore I believe should be excluded from the MVP. Plus, you might need several `const`ness parameters on one type, and that needs new syntax.

[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

> ## How does this work in the compiler?

Reviewer 9: I got entirely lost in this part. And that is despite the fact that I heard of the "host " effect before, which definitely needs more introduction: it means "code needs access to the host machine" aka "not const". I get the desire for not using negations in the name, but "not-const" would be a lot more intuitive I think...

Reviewer 36: I think runtime would be a more intuitive name.

Author: I just renamed it to `constness` in order to not introduce new terminology, but gave a one sentence explainer that the `host` name of the internal data structure is here due to our impl history. We can keep it, as the internal docs for it explain it, or we can change it again in the future now that we don't use a const generic bool anymore but just have an enum with names for things

struct Error;

impl<T: ~const Add<Output = T>> const Add for NewType<T> {
    type Output = Result<Self, Error>;
    fn add(self, other: Self) -> Self::Output {
        if self.1 {
            Ok(NewType(self.0 + other.0, other.1))
        } else {
            // Drops both `self.0` and `self.1`
            Err(Error)
        }
    }
}
```

... then we need to add a `~const Destruct` bound to `T`, to ensure
`NewType<T>` can be dropped.

This bound in turn will be infectious to all generic users of `NewType` like

```rust
const fn add<T: ~const Add>(
    a: NewType<T>,
    b: NewType<T>,
) -> Result<NewType<T::Output>, Error> {
    a + b
}
```

which now need a `T: ~const Destruct` bound, too.
In practice we have noticed that a large portion of APIs will have a `~const Destruct` bound.
This bound has little value as an explicit bound that appears almost everywhere.
Especially since it is a fairly straight forward assumption that a type that has const trait impls will also have a `const Drop` impl or only contain `const Destruct` types.

Thus we give all `const trait`s a `~const Destruct` super trait to ensure users don't need to add `~const Destruct` bounds everywhere.

> We may offer an opt out of this behaviour in the future, if there are convincing real world use cases.

Reviewer 9: Interesting. This can be seen as an extension of the fact that all vtables have a `drop` slot, so in a sense all traits already have the `Destruct` supertrait.

13 | impl<T: ~const Bar + ~const Baz> const Drop for Foo<T> {
   |                      ^^^^^^^^^^
   |
note: the implementor must specify the same requirement
  --> src/lib.rs:8:1
   |
8  | struct Foo<T: Bar>(T);
   | ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

## Adding any feature at all around constness

I think we've reached the point where all critics have agreed that this one kind of effect system is unavoidable since we want to be able to write maintainable code for compile time evaluation.

So the main drawback is that it creates interest in extending the system or add more effect systems, as we have now opened the door with an effect system that supports traits.
Even though I personally am interested in adding an effect for panic-freedom, I do not think that adding this const effect system should have any bearing on whether we'll add
a panic-freedom effect system or other effect systems in the future. This feature stands entirely on its own, and even if we came up with a general system for many effects that is (e.g. syntactically) better in the
presence of many effects, we'll want the syntax from this RFC as sugar for the very common and simple case.

> ## It's hard to make constness optional with `#[cfg]`

Reviewer 25: I understand the reasoning to an extent but I feel I need to ask: how much would it cost to just keep the `#[const_trait]` annotation for a few releases?

I am afraid there may be a lot of pressure on library maintainers to add `const` in front of their traits following the stabilization, and said maintainers may be caught between a rock and a hard place if they wish to maintain a MSRV. Yes a proc-macro could "solve" the issue, but at what cost?

It would be much simpler for everyone if the solution was just to add a feature to the crate, and simply apply `#[cfg_attr(feature = "const_trait", const_trait]`.

Then, later, as the ecosystem moves on and MSRVs get updated across the board, the `#[const_trait]` attribute could be removed in an eventual newer compiler version.

Note: I am not advocating for _stabilizing_ `#[const_trait]`, even when `const Trait` is finally stabilized, if `#[const_trait]` is still allowed as an alternative, I would argue it should remain unstable.

Reviewer 4: > It would be much simpler for everyone if the solution was just to add a feature to the crate, and simply apply `#[cfg_attr(feature = "const_trait", const_trait]`.

It wouldn't when there is anything within the trait that needs `~const Tr` bounds. Those functions still needs to be duplicated and `cfg`ed out when necessary. So the churn in duplicating those individual items is not less than just duplicating the entire `trait`. And I'd say the latter is more readable to both developers and downstream users.

Reviewer 25: > It wouldn't when there is anything within the trait that needs `~const Tr` bounds.

True. I don't have a good feeling for how common it is for traits to have those extra bounds, however.

For example, if I look at the traits in the standard library, all those `Eq`, `Ord, `PartialEq`, `PartialOrd`, `Add`, `Div`, `Mul`, `Neg`, `Rem`, `Sub`, etc... don't have supplementary trait bounds.

And even types that do have trait bounds don't necessarily need those to be `const`: `Iterator`, `IntoIterator`, etc...

Given how low-cost it seems to just keep `#[const_trait]`, unstable, for a little while longer, even if only 25% to 50% of the desirable traits could be constified without churn, wouldn't it be worth it?

Reviewer 4: This is somewhat orthogonal to the RFC discussion as if we do decide to adopt `pub const trait Trait`, how we transition to that syntax from the current one is more on the implementation side and not on the language design side. I personally don't see a benefit in allowing two different ways to write the same thing for a relatively niche use case (libraries using `cfg` to control whether they are const), even if the alternative way is perma-unstable.

If someone wants to use const traits, they have to bump their MSRV. If the concern is that older compilers don't parse `pub const trait Trait`, they can still use something like `cfg-if`.

Reviewer 25: > This is somewhat orthogonal to the RFC discussion as if we do decide to adopt `pub const trait Trait`, how we transition to that syntax from the current one is more on the implementation side and not on the language design side. 

I agree, yet the RFC stated that `#[const_trait]` would be immediately sunset, which is what I am reacting to as I believe it's a flawed implementation strategy.

> If someone wants to use const traits, they have to bump their MSRV.

My point is that the person wanting to use const traits (the library user) and the person deciding whether to bump the MSRV (the library writer) are two different persons, with the library writer being asked in the uncomfortable position of having users wishing to keep to the current MSRV and others asking for `const Trait`.

> If the concern is that older compilers don't parse `pub const trait Trait`, they can still use something like `cfg-if`.

I fear you are once again conflating roles, here.

Today, a library maintainer can release a version of their library which _compiles on stable Rust_, yet also allows nightly users to use their traits in a const context, by using `#[cfg_attr(feature = "const_trait", const_trait)]` on their traits to allow their nightly. It's cheap maintenance-wise (no duplication) so everybody is happy:

  - Stable users get a low MSRV, so don't need to upgrade.
  - Nightly users get their const traits.
  - Maintainers get near-zero maintenance burden.

With this RFC implemented as is -- ie, removing `#[const_trait]` in favor of `const` -- no user of this library would be able to upgrade their nightly compiler until the library maintainer would switch to `cfg-if` to use `const` if the feature is active which means duplicating all their traits, or use some other macro shenanigans. In either case, a much greater maintenance burden for them, and worse code readability for everyone.

That is why I believe that it would be worthwhile to retain `#[const_trait]` as an alternative spelling for a time: to allow a smooth upgrade path in the ecosystem.

Once `const` traits is stabilized, there would be still be pressure on the library maintainer to either switch (bumping the MSRV) or use `cfg-if`, but they would still have the choice to just stall -- asking users to wait another 6 months prior to bumping the MSRV for example -- rather than take on a greater maintenance burden.

And all the while users could still use the library. They'd have to stick to nightly, certainly, but they're already using nightly if they're depending on const traits, so a few more months shouldn't be a big deal for them.

Hence I think maintaining `#[const_trait]` for now, and having a separate issue to decide on its removal -- based on fast, or not, the ecosystem has moved on -- would be a better, lower friction, implementation strategy.

For the purpose of this RFC, I would thus suggest removing the blurb which mentions removing `#[const_trait]` straight away, and instead put the removal of the annotation in a Future Possibility or mentioning it'll be decided separately.

There's really no need to tackle the removal for the main feature of the RFC to be stabilized, so let's not.

Author: I'm fine keeping that attribute and putting it under the `rustc_attrs` feature gate, the maintenance burden is negligible and will be nil once it stabilizes

Reviewer 9: I don't think the RFC has to even talk about what happens with nightly-only unstable features, it is only about the (eventually) stable language surface.

One cannot `#[cfg]` just the `const` keyword in `const Trait`, and even if we made it possible by sticking with `#[const_trait]` attributes, and also adding the equivalent for impls and functions,
`~const Trait` bounds cannot be made conditional with `#[cfg]`. The only real useful reason to have this is to support newer Rust versions with a cfg, and allow older Rust versions to compile
the traits, just without const support. This is surmountable with proc macros that either generate two versions or just generate a different version depending on the Rust version.
Since it's only necessary for a transition period while a crate wants to support both pre-const-trait Rust and
newer Rust versions, this doesn't seem too bad. With a MSRV bump the proc macro usage can be removed again.

> ## Can't have const methods and nonconst methods on the same trait

Reviewer 25: How difficult would it be to support `const` associated functions in traits from the get go?

```rust
trait Foo {
    const fn ctfe();
    
    fn runtime();
}
```

There's already significant support for `const` functions today:

- Functions can be declared `const`, and invoked at compile-time.
- `const` trait functions can be invoked at compile-time.

As an observer it seems a bit bizarre to me to launch `const` traits without support for `const` associated functions, which is likely to lead to churn in the ecosystem, rather than "close the gap" first.

But being just an observer, maybe I'm just misunderstanding how much work bring `const` associated functions would be?

Reviewer 4: > As an observer it seems a bit bizarre to me to launch `const` traits without support for `const` associated functions, which is likely to lead to churn in the ecosystem, rather than "close the gap" first.

Which primary use case do you envision allowing `const fn` in traits enable?

Reviewer 25: As an example, consider the `Store` proposal, which today implements the split-trait strategy in order to provide a const-constructible dangling handle, without forcing the user to have a fully const `Store`, because calling OS primitives isn't const:

```rust
#[const_trait]
trait StoreHandle {
    type Handle: Copy + ...;

    fn dangling(&self) -> Self::Handle;
}

#[const_trait]
trait StoreSingle: StoreHandle {
    fn allocate(&mut self, layout: Layout) -> Result<Self::Handle, AllocError>;

    ...
}
```

This is necessary for:

```rust
impl<T, S> Vec<T, S>
where
    S: StoreSingle,
{
    pub const fn new() -> Self
    where
         S: ~const StoreHandle
    {
         todo!()
    }
}
```

The ideal interface would instead be:

```rust
const trait StoreSingle {
    type Handle: Copy + ...;

    //  No reason NOT to have a const constructible handle type.
    const fn dangling(&self) -> Self::Handle;

    fn allocate(&mut self, layout: Layout) -> Result<Self::Handle, AllocError>;
}
```

Which makes for a simpler API, and enables a simpler implementation:

```rust
impl<T, S> Vec<T, S>
where
    S: StoreSingle,
{
    pub const fn new() -> Self {
         todo!()
    }
}
```

Is a simpler API sufficient motivation to wait for const associated function in traits? Or should the current trait API be split, knowing that splitting is a breaking change, and so is fusing them back when const associated functions make it to stable?

I am afraid that this is the kind of unfortunate trade-off that library maintainers will face, with users that don't care about the const asking to wait, and users who do care about const asking to make the two breaking changes.

It's an uncomfortable situation.

Reviewer 4: I do think this should be looked at, designed, and implemented. However I disagree with saying that we should prioritize this before const traits. Almost all traits in the standard library would benefit from having const traits, and the standard library currently does not have traits (or at least I don't know of anything) that requires all implementers to write a `const fn`. It makes much more sense for us to try to get `for x in 0..100 {}` in const working, and then see if this design pattern would be beneficial.

Also, it would be helpful if you could elaborate (perhaps with more context) on why an associated const wouldn't work in this case, though my point above still stands.

Reviewer 25: > Also, it would be helpful if you could elaborate (perhaps with more context) on why an associated const wouldn't work in this case, though my point above still stands.

It's a good question, actually. I would expect in most cases `S::DANGLING` would work quite well. The one tiny advantage of `store.dangling()` is that the return value can be depend on the instance of `store`. For example it may allow "randomization" by passing a different seed to `store`, to help fuzz usecases where dangling handle is incorrect used to ultimately produce a reference. Quite niche, admittedly.

> It makes much more sense for us to try to get `for x in 0..100 {}` in const working, and then see if this design pattern would be beneficial.

Oh I definitely wish to be able to use traits in `const` contexts. And `for` loops in particular.

Which is why I asked how much work it would be to support `const` associated functions.

It seems like most of the scaffolding is here to me, but I am unfamiliar with compiler internals. If the answer is "it's a couple days work", then I'd argue it's really worth it to avoid all the potential churn (and maintainer pains) in the ecosystem. If the answer is "it's at least a month work, possibly a lot more as there are unresolved questions", then I'll back the decision to just stabilize `const` traits first without reserve.

Would you have an educated guess as to the amount of work required?

Author: I don't think implementation effort should be relevant here.

You can work around this by splitting the trait as you noted, and if that's necessary for a handful of traits in the ecosystem, then I don't think we should add syntax for it from the get go. If we notice this is a common pattern, we can either do something at the language side where split traits can be merged with trait aliases and impls for trait aliases impl all items together, or add `const fn`s to traits. I don't think we need to cover all the possible use cases with this feature from the initial stabilization, especially as making a method `const fn` is a breaking change anyway, so splitting the trait doesn't have a downside on the semver side.

Reviewer 25: > I don't think we need to cover all the possible use cases with this feature from the initial stabilization

I definitely agree. For example I don't see any word about `Box<dyn ~const Trait>`, etc...

I think, instead, that each possible gap/feature should be examined on their own merits, and specifically with regard to the impact on the ecosystem.

Specifically, if a work-around exists to work around the gap, what are the risks of the application of this work-around leaving a "scar" in the ecosystem long after the gap has been closed?

Once an API performs its intended purpose, a maintainer may -- rightfully -- be unwilling to change the API just to "clean it up". In fact, even if the library undergoes a major release anyway, the maintainer may still be reluctant to remove the work-around if they judge that doing so will require too much -- for too little gain -- on their own & their users' parts.

> especially as making a method `const fn` is a breaking change anyway, so splitting the trait doesn't have a downside on the semver side.

You are technically correct, of course. Yet, practically speaking, there's quite a difference between:

 - Having to add `const` to a trait method which was always intended to be `const`, and for which most implementations should already be `const` -- just not advertised as such.
 - Having to move all the items from a trait that used to be split due to a gap in the language support to the main trait the methods were always supposed to be declared on, then clean-up all the split trait uses.

The latter is a much more involved change for downstream users, and as per the above, I am afraid that it may lead to scars lingering in the ecosystem long after const associated functions have become a thing.

_(I must point out that I cannot, obviously, know whether my fear is justified. I would expect it will mostly depend on how much pressure there is for it, and how long the ecosystem has to do without the feature)_

> I don't think implementation effort should be relevant here.

Given the above, I somewhat disagree.

If the implementation effort is small, and waiting for the feature doesn't unduly delay the stabilization of this RFC, then it seems to be an obvious shoe-in to me: a small effort, for large potential savings.

If there is fear that the implementation effort may be much larger, or that waiting for the feature may unduly delay the stabilization of this RFC, then the trade-off is not as clear.

Author: > If the implementation effort is small, and waiting for the feature doesn't unduly delay the stabilization of this RFC, then it seems to be an obvious shoe-in to me: a small effort, for large potential savings.

I think the impl effort is not too large. But we'll still end up with surface language that may be super rarely used.

> Once an API performs its intended purpose, a maintainer may -- rightfully -- be unwilling to change the API just to "clean it up". In fact, even if the library undergoes a major release anyway, the maintainer may still be reluctant to remove the work-around if they judge that doing so will require too much -- for too little gain -- on their own & their users' parts.

Yea. This is a problem we're thinking about with marking just some methods as conditionally const, too. So if we do always const methods, then we should do conditionally const ones, too. And const RPIT, because ppl will write structs instead of RPITs if they can't use RPITs. I'm not sure what the extensions are that we need that will avoid crate authors building slightly unusual APIs that they'd want to have native Rust support for.

And this is where one may rightfully ask why not use RTN instead of all of these individual patches around what RTN would just allow. Ignoring my opinions on RTN and the impl effort required for it, we'd then need to figure out what kind of problems that produces for API authors and users.

Sorry I don't have any answers and only concerns, you may be entirely right at where you draw the line of what is worth doing, but I cannot tell. Possibly just because I have been doing stuff around const traits for years and like the simplicity we've reached right now.

Reviewer 5: > And this is where one may rightfully ask why not use RTN instead of all of these individual patches around what RTN would just allow. Ignoring my opinions on RTN and the impl effort required for it, we'd then need to figure out what kind of problems that produces for API authors and users.

I have some objections to using RTN as a replacement for marking some trait methods as const:
1. if we have a RTN-like syntax, it should not be `T::method(..): const` since that looks like marking the return type as `const` rather than the method itself, I think syntax like `T::method: const` or `T::fn method` is better RTN-like syntax (there should be a better name than RTN since RTN is Return Type Notation -- syntax for getting the return type, not the method itself).
2. using RTN-like syntax makes trait bounds extremely verbose, e.g.
    ```rust
    where
        T: MyTrait,
        T::foo: ~const,
        T::bar: ~const,
        T::baz: ~const,
    ```

To be clear, I'm not saying RTN-like syntax shouldn't exist, but that it should only be used where you can't just mark some trait methods as `const` in the trait definition or mark the whole trait as `const`.

Reviewer 3: This potential for verbosity is shared with RTN also, and the answer we settled on in that case is that we would ship trait aliases, so that rather than repeating, e.g.:

```rust
where
    T: MyTrait,
    T::foo(..): Send,
    T::bar(..): Send,
    T::baz(..): Send,
```

That you could write a trait alias such as `trait SendMyTrait = ..` that states all those bounds once, and that in fact the trait author could use a [proc macro](https://github.com/rust-lang/impl-trait-utils) to wrap that up and never have to spell out those bounds at all, e.g.:

```rust
#[trait_variant::make(SendMyTrait: Send)]
trait MyTrait { .. }
```

In fact, that already [works today](https://docs.rs/trait-variant/latest/trait_variant/attr.make.html) without trait aliases, because we can polyfil that in other ways.

The point is, shipping some more precise and expressive mechanism doesn't mean that people are forced to use that all the time.  As with RTN, we can build on top of it to handle the common case.

In terms of a name, I'd probably call this return effects notation (REN).  In terms of syntax, I don't think `T::foo: ..` is right.  That notates the type of the function item itself, which the set of output effects are not.  If we had or planned a generic effects notation, e.g.:

```rust
fn f<effect K>(x: u8) -> u8 do K { x }
```

Then I'd suggest to mirror that with REN, and so we'd write:

```rust
where T: Tr<foo(..): do const>
```

Reviewer 2: > output effects

What do you mean by “output” here?

Reviewer 3: If we were to write:

```rust
fn f<T: Send>() -> Vec<T> { Vec::new() }
     ~             ~~~~~~
  Input type     Output type
```

We might say that the function takes an input type and produces an output (or return) type.  Similarly, with generic effects, we could say:

```rust
fn f<effect K>() -> () do K - const { .. }
//          ~             ~~~~~~~~~
//   Input effect set     Output effect set
```

That is, the function takes an input set of effects, and produces an output (or return) set of effects.

Reviewer 9: "out effects" or "return effects" make no sense to me. In formal notation, the effects of a function are often annotated at the arrow, since they are part of the process from the inputs to the outputs.

What you call "input effect set" and "output effect set" is an artifact of row polymorphism, I don't think it s a good guide for terminology here.

Reviewer 3: > Also why do you abbreviate "effects" with "K" in "RKN"?

It reads better than "REN" to me, and it's common to want to replace vowels with consonants in these kind of initialisms (e.g. using "X" to represent "express").  Using "K" for "effect" seems natural and something people do, e.g. the "[Effekt](https://effekt-lang.org/)" language.  Though, I do find it unfortunate in one way, which is that we (the PL community broadly) also tend to use "k" for "continuation".

> "output effects" or "return effects" make no sense to me...

Yes, I don't know.  I had gone back and forth about it and decided I thought it did make sense in the following way.  Given:

```rust
trait Tr<T> {
    type Ty;
}
```

We might (and tend to) say that this takes a set of input generics and produces an "output" type.  It's a type-level mapping.

So, if we had the effect equivalents of this:

```rust
trait Tr<effect K> {
    effect Kt;
}
```

Then here too, I'd probably want to say that we have input and output effects.

So, then, in the same way that we map functions to `Fn*` traits with input and output type generics, probably we'd map effectful functions to `Fn*` traits with input and output effect generics.

It may seem tempting to use `const fn foo<T: const Trait>` to mean what in this RFC is `~const Trait`, and then add new syntax for bounds that allow using trait methods in const blocks.

Examples of possible always const syntax:

* `=const Trait`
* `const const Trait` (lol)
* `const(always) Trait` (`pub` like)
* `const<true> Trait` (effect generic like)
* `const! Trait`

## use `Trait<const>` or `Trait<bikeshed#effect: const>` instead of `const Trait`

To avoid new syntax before paths referring to traits, we could treat the constness as a generic parameter or an associated type.
While an associated type is very close to how the implementation works, neither `effect = const` nor `effect: const` are representing the logic correctly,
as `const` implies `~const`, but `~const` is nothing concrete, it's more like a generic parameter referring to the constness of the function.
Fully expanded one can think of

```rust
const fn foo<T: ~const Trait + const OtherTrait>(t: T) { ... }
```

to be like

```rust
const<const C: bool> fn foo<T>(t: T)
where
    T: Trait + OtherTrait,
    <T as Trait>::bikeshed#effect = const<C>,
    <T as OtherTrait>::bikeshed#effect = const<true>,
{
    ...
}

> ```

Reviewer 9: For the reference-level section, this seems more understandable than the `<T as Default>::k#host = Conditionally` thing above, but maybe that's just because I have already through about the "be generic over constness" formulation quite a bit.

```rust
const fn foo<T>(t: T)
where
    T: Trait + OtherTrait,
    <T as Trait>::bikeshed#effect = ~const,
    <T as OtherTrait>::bikeshed#effect = const,
{
    ...
}
```

or

```rust
const fn foo<T: Trait<bikeshed#effect = ~const> + OtherTrait<bikeshed#effect = const>>(t: T) { ... }
```

## Make all `const fn` arguments `~const Trait` by default and require an opt out `?const Trait`

We could default to making all `T: Trait` bounds be const if the function is called from a const context, and require a `T: ?const Trait` opt out
for when a trait bound is only used for its associated types and consts.

This requires a new `~const fn` syntax (sigils or syntax bikesheddable), as the existing `const fn` already has trait bounds that
do not require const trait impls even if used in const contexts.

An example from libstd today is [the impl block of Vec::new](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/1ab85fbd7474e8ce84d5283548f21472860de3e2/library/alloc/src/vec/mod.rs#L406) which has an implicit `A: Allocator` bound from [the type definition](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/1ab85fbd7474e8ce84d5283548f21472860de3e2/library/alloc/src/vec/mod.rs#L397).

> A full example how how things would look then

Reviewer 9: The example does not use the `~const fn` syntax that the text above says is needed, so I am confused.

```rust

> const trait Foo: Bar + ?const Baz {}

Reviewer 2: There should be an equivalent of this example with the current proposed syntax (`const trait Foo: ~const Bar + Baz {}`), just to be clear and explicit about what supertrait bounds look like.

Ideally, there would also be an example with `#![feature(trait_alias)]` (e.g. `const trait Foo = ~const Bar + Baz;`); or alternately, those should be explicitly relegated to a future possibility.

    // cannot call `Baz` methods
    <T as Bar>::bar()
}

const _: () = foo();
```

This can be achieved across an edition by having some intermediate syntax like prepending `#[next_const]` attributes to all const fn that are using the new syntax, and having a migration lint that suggests adding it to every `const fn` that has trait bounds.

Then in the following edition, we can forbid the `#[next_const]` attribute and just make it the default.

The disadvantage of this is that by default, it creates stricter bounds than desired.

```rust
const fn foo<T: Foo>() {
    T::ASSOC_CONST
}
```

compiles today, and allows all types that implement `Foo`, irrespective of the constness of the impl.
With the opt-out scheme that would still compile, but suddenly require callers to provide a const impl.

The safe default (and the one folks are used to for a few years now on stable), is that trait bounds just work, you just
can't call methods on them.
This is both useful in

* nudging function authors to using the minimal necessary bounds to get their function
body to compile and thus requiring as little as possible from their callers,
* ensuring our implementation is correct by default.

> The implementation correctness argument is partially due to our history with `?const` (see https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/83452 for where we got it wrong and thus decided to stop using opt-out), and partially with our history with `?` bounds not being great either (https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/135229, https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/132209). An opt-in is much easier to make sound and keep sound.

Reviewer 9: The first issue referenced here is not a `?const` issue, it is a min const fn issue, isn't it? We meant to reject `const fn foo<T: Foo>()` but some loopholes were left open.

Author: Yes, which is my whole argument. An opt out is too easy to get wrong.

Reviewer 9: The text says this is about the history of `?const` bounds, and then links to a PR that has nothing to do with `?const` bounds. That's at the very least confusing.

I also find this not a good justification for lang design decisions -- a borrowck is also easy to get wrong, so should we just not do it? Or a coherent trait system? IMO this is not a good argument.

Reviewer 2: If the behavior is hard to understand for implementers, it’s going to be even harder for users. (Borrowck is a great example here!) Given that the simpler design can do anything the complicated one can, why bother with the latter?

Reviewer 9: The implementation concerns aren't about "hard to understand". The concept of "const fn should not have trait bounds" is trivial to understand, it just turns out it's easy to get wrong during implementation. Given that the difference is entirely syntactical, I don't think the proposed alternative is any harder or easier to understand than what the RFC says.

There are [good arguments](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1921046669) against making `~const Trait` the default. I think the RFC should focus on gathering those. I just don't think "we got something wrong in the compiler because it was implemented in a very syntax-directed manner" is a good argument.

Reviewer 2: > only in syntax

Yes, syntax that is context- and edition-dependent. The current RFC does not have that problem.

Reviewer 9: That's a different argument from what the RFC makes, so it seems you are agreeing with me on the original point that started this subthread?

Not sure what you mean by "context-dependent syntax". But yes, an edition migration has downsides. Anyway please move discussion of the alternative proposal to the [other thread](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1920469894); this thread is about the paragraph starting "The implementation correctness argument is partially due to our history". The argument that the RFC makes here is rather odd in two ways:
- The argument is not supported by the issue it links. I don't think "we got something entirely unrelated to `~const` wrong in the past" supports the claim that `?const` is hard to implement. "We forgot to check `where` clauses" is obvious in hindsight, such issues happen and I don't buy the implicit claim that the proposed RFC is somehow immune to oversights like this (or less susceptible to them than the `?const` alternative). I don't buy the relation to `?Sized` either, these are very different things -- `?Sized` adds a fundamentally new concept to the language that would not exist otherwise; `?const` does not involve a new concept compared with `~const`.
- It's a weak argument to begin with, given that the entire underlying complexity here is about parsing. The rustc architecture makes it somewhat tricky to support certain syntax only in a few specific places rather than everywhere. The obvious solution is to support the syntax everywhere. ;) More seriously though
  - `~const` apparently would also be supported only in a few places, so it has exactly the same issue.
  - If the syntax provides enough benefits, I don't think we should reject it for reasons like this. That would be really, *really* bad news for the future evolution of Rust. Maybe we should block it on a re-architecture of the parser that makes such issues less likely to occur, or so, but we can't stop adding good syntax just because our parser/lowering has a suboptimal architectures.

Author: > * `~const` apparently would also be supported only in a few places, so it has exactly the same issue.

The linked things about other `?` bounds like `?Sized` or abitrary `?Trait` are not parser issues. They are handled "correctly" all the way to the type system, they are just either redundant there, because the traits are already opted out, or in the case of `?const` we were missing a requirement for an opt-out. It is much easier to forbid an opt-in, instead of requiring an opt-out, because you're forbidding the existance of something instead of forbidding the non-existance of something.

Anyway, I do not want to review, maintain or do that work (and thus be on the hook for any potential breakage around there), so 🤷 I will not talk about it anymore and others can figure it out. We can instead talk about the lang reasons not to do the opt out (other threads).

Reviewer 9: I'm completely okay with the RFC comparing `~const`  and `?const` entirely based on lang reasons and concluding that `~const` is the better choice for now. In fact I think that's exactly what the RFC should do -- the migration effort alone makes `?const` not suited for an MVP. But then the text that this thread is attached to (i.e., the implementation reasons) should be removed.

Author: I don't know how to remove that without also removing the history. Feel free to propose a diff and I'll accept it. Otherwise I will leave it as is. Everything except these two sentences is about the non-impl things.

Reviewer 9: I still think "An opt-in is much easier to make sound and keep sound" is just not true (the difference is entirely syntax). And the issue linked here

> due to our history with `?const` (see https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/83452 for where we got it wrong and thus decided to stop using opt-out)

is not about `?const`. So my proposed edit would be to just remove this paragraph. Since I assume you won't like that I'll add a proposal that just removes the IMO entirely unrelated points about `?Sized`.

        * Alternatively `where <T as Trait>::some_fn(..): ~const` or `where <T as Trait>::some_fn \ {const}`.
        * Very verbose (need to specify arguments and return type).
        * Want short hand sugar anyway to make it trivial to change a normal function to a const function by just adding some minor annotations.
        * Significantly would delay const trait stabilization (by years).
        * Usually requires editing the trait anyway, so there's no "can constify impls without trait author opt in" silver bullet.
    * New RTN-like per-method bounds: `T: Trait<some_fn(_): ~const>`.
        * Unclear if soundly possible.
        * Unclear if possible without incurring significant performance issues for all code (may need tracking new information for all functions out there).
        * Still requires editing traits.
        * Still want the `~const Trait` sugar anyway.

## Should we start out by allowing only const trait declarations and const trait impls

We do not need to immediately allow using methods on generic parameters of const fn, as a lot of const code is nongeneric.

> The following example could be made to work with just const traits and const trait impls.

Reviewer 9: Really? the PartialEq impl for arrays is generic so how do we express "arrays of `T` are `const PartialEq` if `T` is"?

In fact the RFC seems to entirely lack discussion of "conditionally const impls", or did I miss that? I guess they implicitly exist for the discussion around `const Destruct` bounds to make sense. the reference section IMO focuses too much on hard-to-follow compiler implementation details and not enough on what exactly the full list of new capabilities is, where `~const` bounds can appear, etc.

Reviewer 2: > In fact the RFC seems to entirely lack discussion of "conditionally const impls", or did I miss that?

I think this is just an oversight/missing example. See my comment here: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3762#discussion_r1920669657

Reviewer 9: That comment is about supertraits, I am talking about impls.

Reviewer 13: > how do we express "arrays of T are const PartialEq if T is"

I imagine
```rust
impl<T: ~const PartialEq, const N: usize> ~const PartialEq for [T; N] { ... }
```
but indeed that's not explicitly included in the RFC. And thi smuddles up the meaning of `~const` since this one doesn't depend on a calling context.

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

## Migrate to `~const fn`

`const fn` and `const` items have slightly different meanings for `const`:

`const fn` can also be called at runtime just fine, while the others are always const
contexts and need to be evaluated by the const evaluator.

Additionally `const Trait` bounds have a third meaning (the same as `const Trait` in `impl const Trait for Type`):

They can be invoked at compile time, but also in `const fn`.

While all these meanings are subtly different, making their differences more obvious will not make them easier to understand.
All that changing to `~const fn` would achieve is that folk will add the sigil when told by the compiler, and complain about
having to type a sigil, when there is no meaning for `const fn` without a sigil.

While I see the allure from a language nerd perspective to give every meaning its own syntax, I believe it is much more practical to
just call all of these `const` and only separate the `~const Trait` bounds from `const Trait` bounds.

## `const fn()` pointers

> Just like `const fn foo(x: impl ~const Trait) { x.method() }` and `const fn foo(x: &dyn ~const Trait) { x.method() }` we want to allow
> `const fn foo(f: const fn()) { f() }`.

Reviewer 9: Why is there no `~` in the `const fn` type here? fn ptrs and dyn traits should be very analogous. so `const fn(i32) -> i32` would be a function ptr pointing to a definitely-const fn, and `~const fn(i32) -> i32` would only required to be const if we are ourselves being called in const context. or something like that?

So what I would expect is
```suggestion
Just like `const fn foo(x: impl ~const Trait) { x.method() }` and `const fn foo(x: &dyn ~const Trait) { x.method() }` we want to allow
`const fn foo(f: ~const fn()) { f() }`.
```

There is nothing design-wise blocking function pointers and calling them, they mainly require implementation work and extending the

> compiler's internal type system representation of a function signature to include constness.

Reviewer 2: Are we sure about that? I’m worried about subtyping issues. One nice property upheld by this RFC is “you should never run into `const`-related issues if you are not actually executing code in `const`”, but I’m not sure how easy that will be to preserve with function pointers or `dyn`.

For example, if I have an `fn foo(x: impl Trait<Assoc = fn()>)`, can I pass in an `impl Trait<Assoc = const fn()>`? There are situations where that might be necessary, but also situations where it can’t be allowed. Also, what is the behavior of `TypeId`? Etc.

Reviewer 36: `const fn()` and `fn()` will need to be different have `TypeId`s, at least if we want to support `dyn const Any` in the future.

Reviewer 36: `const fn()` and `fn()` will need to be different have `TypeId`s, at least if we want to support `dyn const Any` in the future.

Fully contained example ([Playground of currently working example](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=2ab8d572c63bcf116b93c632705ddc1b)):

```rust

> [const] trait Default {

Author: the jury is still out on this one, as similarly to `const fn` there is no benefit of choosing `[const] trait` over `const trait`, as the latter can't mean anything different

Reviewer 4: Yeah, that's also true

## Nomenclature and new syntax concepts

### Const trait methods

> Traits can declare methods as `const`. Doing so is a breaking change, as all impls are now required to provide a `const` method,

Reviewer 24: *adding* const to an existing method is a breaking change.

Author: the point is adding a new defaulted function is fine to be `const`. it's when you add `const` to an existing function

Similarly other traits will be made `const` over time, but doing so will be
unblocked by this feature.

### `const Fn*` traits

All `const fn` implement the corresponding `const Fn()` trait:

```rust
const fn foo<F: ~const Fn()>(f: F) {
    f()
}

const fn bar() {
    foo(baz)
}

const fn baz() {}
```

Arguments and the return type of such functions and bounds follow the same rules as
their non-const equivalents, so you may have to add `~const` bounds to other generic
parameters, too:

```rust
const fn foo<T: ~const Debug, F: ~const Fn(T)>(f: F, arg: T) {
    f(arg)
}

const fn bar<T: ~const Debug>(arg: T) {
    foo(baz, arg)
}

const fn baz<T: ~const Debug>() {}

> ```

Reviewer 3: I was interested in the question of in what cases the `~const` in `foo<T: ~const Debug, ..>` might be needed.  Here's a mockup to check my understanding:

[Playground link](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2024&code=%2F%2F%40+edition%3A+2024%0A%23%21%5Bfeature%28const_trait_impl%2C+const_destruct%29%5D%0A%23%21%5Ballow%28unused%29%5D%0A%0Ause+core%3A%3Amarker%3A%3ADestruct%3B%0A%0A%23%5Bconst_trait%5D%0Atrait+Debug%3A+~const+Destruct+%7B%0A++++fn+debug%28%26self%29+%7B%7D%0A%7D%0A%0Aimpl+const+Debug+for+%28%29+%7B%7D%0A%0A%23%5Bconst_trait%5D%0Atrait+FnOnce%3CArg%3E+%7B%0A++++type+Output%3A+~const+Destruct%3B%0A++++fn+call_once%28self%2C+arg%3A+Arg%29+-%3E+Self%3A%3AOutput%3B%0A%7D%0A%0Astruct+Baz%3B%0Aimpl%3CArg%3A+~const+Debug%3E+const+FnOnce%3CArg%3E+for+Baz+%7B%0A++++type+Output+%3D+%28%29%3B%0A++++fn+call_once%28self%2C+arg%3A+Arg%29+-%3E+Self%3A%3AOutput+%7B%0A++++++++arg.debug%28%29%3B%0A++++%7D%0A%7D%0A%0Aconst+fn+foo%3CT%3A+Debug%2C+F%3A+~const+FnOnce%3CT%3E%3E%28f%3A+F%2C+arg%3A+T%29+%7B%0A++++f.call_once%28arg%29%3B%0A%7D%0A%0Aconst+fn+bar%3CT%3A+~const+Debug%3E%28arg%3A+T%29+%7B%0A++++foo%28Baz%2C+arg%29%3B%0A%7D%0A%0Aconst+_%3A+%28%29+%3D+bar%28%28%29%29%3B%0Aconst+_%3A+%28%29+%3D+foo%28Baz%2C+%28%29%29%3B%0A%0Afn+main%28%29+%7B%7D%0A)

That is, I gather that it's not needed, which is I suppose not surprising, though a bit subtle, since the `Debug` bound isn't needed there either.

If that encoding is wrong, of course, let me know, otherwise perhaps it'd be more clear to write this example as `const fn foo<T, F: ~const Fn(T)>`.
